The Ingonyama Trust Board (ITB) may be forced to pay back millions of rands it has unlawfully collected in rent for nearly a decade from people living on land it controls on behalf of King Goodwill Zwelithini. Last year the board took in about R107-million from commercial and residential leases it issued, but how much of this is from residents whose permission to occupy (PTO) certificates were converted into leases is not clear. In terms of the leases, which carry a 10% annual escalation, residents who previously paid only a once-off levy to the traditional authority under which they fall now have to pay an annual rental to the board. The board administers about three million hectares of land in KwaZulu-Natal on behalf of Zwelithini, the sole trustee of the Ingonyama Trust. The trust was set up on the eve of the 1994 elections to give the monarch control of the land that made up the KwaZulu Bantustan. This week a challenge to the board’s lease programme has been lodged in the high court, asking that it be declared unlawful and that the PTO certificates and customary rights held by residents be reinstated. The challenge has been brought by the Legal Resources Centre on behalf of the Council for the Advancement of the South African Constitution (Casac) and the Rural Women’s Movement. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.