Phehello J Mofokeng’s book, Sankomota: An Ode in One Album, might be about a recording that took place in Lesotho more than 35 years ago, but its cues are more recent. Though squarely about the cultural significance of Sankomota’s self-titled first album, it is inspired as much by writer Tseliso Monaheng’s article An Ode to Sankomota (published in Mahala online magazine in 2011) as by Percy Mabandu’s Yakhal’inkomo: Portrait of a Jazz Classic, which he self-published in 2016. The Sankomota album was recorded in Shifty Records’s mobile studio in 1983. The studio was driven to Maseru because the band had been banned in South Africa. The pocket-sized book is compact in size yet measuredly impassioned in expression. Mofokeng, founder of Gecko Publishing, is not a musician, so his ode, self-consciously perhaps, traverses many terrains, finding room in the articulation of orature, as expounded by scholars such as Ngugi wa Thiong’o and Pio Zirimu. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.