In “Is it rational to vote for one of the big three?”, Eusebius McKaiser made a case for why voters should not vote for the ANC, the Democratic Alliance or the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) and suggested that voters consider other political parties. People may disagree with the reasons McKaiser gave — I certainly don’t agree with his politics — but his suggestion on considering voting for political parties other than the big three makes sense. My problem with McKaiser is that he didn’t factor in the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC) and the Azanian People’s Organisation (Azapo) because these organisations don’t exist in his vocabulary. In his response to McKaiser’s article, Mathew Blatchford (“Eusebius has an agenDA”), also didn’t factor in the PAC and Azapo because he writes: “In effect, McKaiser is asking us to waste our votes, because the tiny parties have no policies worthy of mention and can only cling to the DA under the special circumstances prevailing in some big municipalities. The forthcoming election is provincial and national, where the tiny parties have no effect at all.” A vote for the PAC or Azapo is not a wasted vote.
The PAC and Azapo have cogent policies. They are not tiny organisations because their strengths can’t be measured by an electoral system presided over by an ANC government, which was installed in government by the West by a rigged 1994 election. The PAC and Azapo have not formed alliances and coalitions with the DA. In this regard, McKaiser and Blatchford are wrong. Both McKaiser’s article and Blatchford’s letter have glaring shortcomings and are contradictory. For example, McKaiser wrote about not being nostalgic about the historical roots of our main parties on the one hand and the DA being silent and shockingly tone-deaf about the experiences of the black majority and the connections between our colonial past and present on the other. A survey conducted earlier this year indicated that most South Africans didn’t know anything about the Constitution and didn’t even know South Africa has a Constitution. Did McKaiser and Blatchford take this into consideration? McKaiser hinted that this line of thinking is condescending. This doesn’t explain why voters vote for mediocre political parties. The jury is still out on the level of political consciousness among South Africans. McKaiser suggested that voters should not vote for the ANC, the DA or the EFF, yet Blatchford says McKaiser is a DA supporter. That might be the case. McKaiser clearly said, however, that voters should consider political parties other than the ANC, the DA and the EFF. Blatchford says the EFF is a threat to the oligarchy, yet he ignored its hobnobbing with the Royal Institute for International Affairs and Robin Renwick. Does he understand what the institute stands for and who Renwick represents? — Sam Ditshego, Kagiso It was the celebrated African-American writer Dr Maya Angelou who said: “You may encounter many defeats, but you must not be defeated.” On November 18, Patricia de Lille announced that she will be launching a new political movement after her relationship with the Democratic Alliance broke down irreparably. In 2010, De Lille, then leader of the Independent Democrats (ID), reached an agreement with the then leader of the Democratic Alliance, Helen Zille, to collapse the ID into the DA. The foundation of this new relationship was built on a desire to realign opposition politics. Naturally, a plan to assimilate social democrats and liberal democrats would be subject to great potential frictions, especially in a country like South Africa where there are serious national questions that need decisive policy positions. Little areas of disagreement can turn into profound chasms of opinion. The liberals in the DA never forgave De Lille for her Pan-Africanist background. Even when De Lille put on her best performance as a liberal democrat it was simply not convincing. Vedantic philosophy speaks about vasanas, inherent nature. De Lille’s inherent nature is that she a strong and bold leader who is not afraid to give orders or to take action. But because she operated in an environment that is predominantly male and white, which would seek to second-guess executive action, it was a recipe for disaster. In any political party there are traditionalists who believe they are the most authentic version of what that organisation represents. We were told that De Lille governed with an iron fist, but I have not heard of such accusations being deployed against males in the DA. De Lille has suffered greatly at the hands of the DA. Her courage to clear her name is a lesson that we can draw inspiration from. Let us open our hearts to this new movement and be prepared to listen to what is on offer. Show them flames, De Lille. — Bevin Dorkin, Germiston 