The most precious commodity in farming is water, but the law still largely favours large-scale farmers, the majority of whom are white, to the detriment of those previously disadvantaged. This is according to a report released this week by the International Water Management Institute, which focused on how to “decolonise formal water laws” in Malawi, Kenya, South Africa, Uganda and Zimbabwe. Today’s farmers in South Africa have to apply for a water permit to make use of bodies of water, such as dams and rivers, and the process is much more onerous than it was during apartheid, when only white people were granted licences. The report states that a permit application takes about 300 working days. It also notes that the licensing processes are often costly, bureaucratic and inaccessible to many South Africans. “In South Africa, with its history of racially based capitalism, the overwhelming majority of registered water users are white,” says the report. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.