Warnings to watch your spending and not take on unwanted debt on Black Friday are becoming as numerous as the deals being advertised. Despite expectations that some consumers will gorge on credit to shop on Black Friday and throughout the festive season, there are indications that South Africans are getting better at managing their debt, according to economist Mike Schussler. Although there will be people who take on too much debt and although consumers are under stress because of high unemployment levels and slow economic growth, South Africa’s levels of household debt to disposable income are at their lowest levels in a decade, says Schussler. Data compiled by him, using information from the Bank of International Settlements, reveals that South Africa’s ratio of household debt to gross domestic product (GDP) has declined steadily compared with other emerging markets. Household debt to GDP declined from 43.9% in the first quarter of 2008 to 33.1% in the first quarter of this year. In other emerging markets, household debt rose from 19.1% to 35% in the same period. In addition, household debt to disposable income levels in South Africa declined from peak levels of almost 88% in 2008 to just over 71% in 2018. “Quite frankly, the South African consumer no longer has the same debt problem and that’s why our retail sales continue to increase, albeit slowly,” Schussler says. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.