The bottom line was $208-billion at the Africa Investment Forum in Sandton this week. The president of the African Development Bank, Akinwumi Adesina, said the forum was a “game changer” and what distinguished it from any global exchange forum was that it was not just another talk shop, but 100% transactional. Adesina said the forum had 306 project transactions worth $208-billion, which have been developed. And investors and promoters discussed 60 projects and deals worth $40-billion with the aim of fast-tracking closure and removing policy and regulatory constraints. The recurrent theme was: Africa is making a transition from aid to investment through collaboration with the private sector and the removal of policy and regulatory barriers to trade. Several heads of state and government officials attended the forum. President Cyril Ramaphosa was joined by heads of state, including Sahle-Work Zewde from Ethiopia, Macky Sall from Senegal, Alpha Condé of Guinea, Ghana’s Nana Akufo-Addo, Nigeria’s vice-president Yemi Osinbajo and the prime minister of Cameroon, Philémon Yang. According to the Development Bank’s 2018 Africa economic outlook, financing of $600-billion to $700-billion is needed, of which $130-billion to $170-billion would be used for clearing infrastructure backlogs. Ramaphosa said governments would not be able to bridge this gap alone, but that co-operation with the private sector was an integral part of growing economic activity and infrastructure development. The president has been on a drive to attract investment since he was elected in February. In October, South Africa held its first investment summit, which garnered R290-billion in investments and R400-billion in investment pledges towards his goal of raising $100-billion in investments over five years. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.