Low-cost retailer Pepkor Holdings shrugged off its links to former parent company Steinhoff International and withstood the recessionary climate, expanding its retail footprint by more than 400 stores this year and planning to open 300 more in the new year. Previously known as Steinhoff Retail Africa, Pepkor Holdings released its first financial results under its new name on Monday, reporting revenue up by 10.9% to R64.2-billion with operating profit up by 10.7% to R6.4-billion. This excludes a once-off R511-million write-down because of Pepkor’s exposure to a previously undisclosed management incentive plan. The JSE announced, also on Monday and before the results, that Pepkor was being fined R5-million because the company failed to reveal its loan agreements and debt guarantees for management and Steinhoff. Pepkor’s share price fell by 1.4% when the JSE announcement was made on Monday, but had recovered by Wednesday morning. The retailer increased its store footprint by 428 stores in 2018, 358 of which were in the clothing and merchandise division. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.