Following a year of marathon hearings, revelations of mismanagement, private use of public entities and a recent leak of the preliminary findings, Parliament’s portfolio committee on public enterprises adopted its final report into allegations of state capture at Eskom and Transnet on Wednesday morning. The report will now be referred to Parliament to be adopted by the legislature. Among other things, the report raises questions about individuals who either failed to make themselves available for questioning during the inquiry, or should, according to the report, be summoned to the judicial commission of inquiry chaired by Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo. While the report is not accusatory in nature, it recommends that those who are implicated in governance failures at public entities present their versions at the abovementioned commission. Former South African Airways chair Dudu Myeni is named having been expected to come before the parliamentary inquiry into state capture, but failed to do so. The inquiry report recommends that she present herself to the Zondo commission to give her version of events behind the state of affairs at the national carrier. The report further recommends that former board members and executives at Eskom appear before the inquiry regarding allegations against them, and their role in whatever events may have hobbled the power utility. Eskom board chairs Zola Tsotsi and Ben Ngubane, former acting group chief executive Matshela Koko, former interim board chair Zethembe Khoza, former CEO Brian Molefe, former chief financial officer Anoj Singh, former acting CFO Sean Maritz and former board members Pathmanathan Naidoo and Devapushpum Naidoo were recommended to appear before the Zondo commission. Former president Jacob Zuma’s son Duduzane Zuma is mentioned in the final report adopted on Wednesday. The report recommends that action be taken against him. The report also recommends that action be taken against Rajesh ‘Tony’ Gupta, Atul Gupta and Ajay Gupta for failing to present themselves to the inquiry upon request, and that the Zondo commission summon these individuals. Former Oakbay CEO Nazeem Howa has a question mark looming over his name regarding whether held any sway over state-owned companies like Eskom, or officials like former minister of mineral resources Mosebenzi Zwane. Acting CEO of Oakbay Ronica Ragavan is also named in the report with regard to her potential influence.
Ravindra Nath of Tegeta Exploration and Resources is mentioned as an individual that may have had had undue influence over the goings on at Eskom. Albatime owner Kuben Moodley got a mention as an individual who reportedly claimed to have the power to make connections that allowed companies to land lucrative contracts with state-owned enterprises like Transnet and Eskom. Gupta associate Ashu Chalwa is named as the potential fixer, central in facilitating visas for the Guptas and the family for their naturalisation process. Former minister of public enterprises Lynne Brown was roasted during the committee’s hearings last year by current Minister of Public Enterprises Pravin Gordhan. She was mentioned in the report for potentially neglecting her duties in the wake of the state capture project. Former Minister Malusi Gigaba served as minister of public enterprises, home affairs and finance in the past eight years. The committee report indicates actions took place during his time at public enterprises which may indicate that he failed to give due oversite in the portfolio. Former minister of mineral resources Mosebenzi Zwane is mentioned in connection with the approval of a transfer by Tegeta of the Koornfontein and Optimum Mine Rehabilitation Trust Funds to the Indian Bank of Baroda. “Tegeta transferred the Koornfontein Trust funds amounting to R280-million to the Bank of Baroda in May 2016, and the Optimum Trust funds amounting to R1.47-billion in June 2016,” the report reads. Following the committee’s adoption of the report, it is now in Parliament’s hands to adopt and formally furnish to the Zondo commission. — Fin24