Tax evasion and avoidance by multinationals have been identified for decades as prime contributors to continuing global inequality. The issue has been raised in institutions such as the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the G20, because a global response is needed, given that national jurisdictions are involved, but progress has been painfully slow. Now there is a new front in the fight to make multinationals pay tax where they earn their income. A consortium of trade unions and nongovernment organisations (NGOs) last month launched a case in the Netherlands against fuel giant Chevron to compel it to pay its share of tax. Unusually, the case is not being brought before a court of law but being taken to the OECD, specifically the national contact point (NCP), a facility set up in each member country, which is being asked by the complainants to arbitrate the dispute. The complainants are Dutch trade union federation FNV, the International Transport Workers’ Federation (ITF), Public Services International and IndustriALL Global Union, with support from the NGO Friends of the Earth. The respondents are 14 Chevron companies registered at two Dutch addresses, one in Amsterdam and the other in Rotterdam. FNV’s Lucia van Westerlaak says Chevron had been singled out partly because the ITF had research on its activities, although many other multinationals also avoided paying tax. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.