Economists who have modelled the future of the economy should the country opt for the expropriation of land without compensation have predicted the result will be extreme economic decline, junk status and at least 2.28-million jobs lost. Researchers Roelof Botha, of the Gordon Institute of Business Science (GIBS), and Ilse Botha, of the University of Johannesburg’s department of accountancy, in a report on the macroeconomic effect of a policy of land expropriation without compensation, conclude that it will result in a predictable decline in capital formation, leading to a prolonged recession, increased unemployment and declining tax revenue. The researchers base their forecasts on evidence from seven countries — Portugal, Spain, Romania, Vietnam, Venezuela, Ethiopia and Zimbabwe — that pursued similar policies that threatened private property ownership. “Empirical evidence confirms the stifling effect on initiative, entrepreneurship and productivity inherent in the plethora of regulations and restrictions that accompany an institutionalised system where private property ownership is not guaranteed and protected by law,” the authors say. In the countries studied, there was a decline in capital formation to gross domestic product (GDP) after the implementation of policies that threatened private property rights, resulting in “debilitating effects on their economies”. They warn that “imminent socioeconomic disaster” awaits South Africa should expropriation without compensation be implemented. The researchers say that, where there was a recovery, this was as a result of reversing the policy. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.