Botswana storyteller Tanlume Enyatseng is becoming himself, and he will not have it any other way. “It was a dark, dark night.” This sentence won Enyatseng a spot in his school’s newsletter, its public ­noticeboard and his English teacher’s heart. He was five or six years old, too young to comprehend the beginnings of an obsession with storytelling and too perplexed by the attention he received for ­completing what was, to him, a “very simple classroom exercise”. With an equal measure of pride and defeat, the writer and artist recounts this ­memory as one of many moments that have led him to the conviction that all he has ever been — or wanted to be— is a storyteller. Today, roughly 25 years after his debut “dark, dark night”, Enyatseng describes himself as a ­“passionate advocate for creative intellect and culture … through my work as a writer, creative director and content producer telling stories in new and unusual ways”. In his blog, Banana Emoji, Enyatseng’s work weaves together lived experiences, fantasy and social commentary related to the construction and ­representation of memory and imagination. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.