The supporters of those implicated in the damning evidence that former public enterprises minister Barbara Hogan will present to the Zondo commission have been mobilising and painting Pravin Gordhan, Maria Ramos and Trevor Manuel as part of a group that rides roughshod over legitimate ANC structures. On Wednesday, Hogan will give evidence to the Commission of Inquiry into State Capture chaired by Constitutional Court Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo. She will detail how former president Jacob Zuma, soon after his election in 2009, started meddling in the appointment of board members and executives of state-owned enterprises, which led to her removal as minister. Her affidavit also links fired Transnet chief executive officer (CEO) Siyabonga Gama to the state capture machinery. In her affidavit detailing her 17 months in the Cabinet, Hogan says Zuma went as far as circumventing Cabinet processes in the appointment and dismissals of the chief executives of Transnet and Eskom. “The conduct of president Zuma and certain members of his Cabinet in relation to Transnet and Eskom was not only negligent, it was reckless and designed to frustrate the sincere attempts of the boards of those state-owned entities to exercise their fiduciary duties as directors and the exercise of sound corporate governance in their respective state-owned entities,” she says. She also details how she and former SAA board chairperson Cheryl Carolus resisted efforts by the chief executive of Jet Airways, Naresh Goyal, to convince them that SAA should withdraw from its lucrative Mumbai route, even doorstepping Hogan at a fashion show in India during Zuma’s state visit there. After Hogan was removed from Cabinet in October 2010, SAA dropped the route. State capture corruption at Transnet, including the contract for 1 064 locomotives, which netted Gupta-linked individuals billions in unearned fees, are at the heart of Gama’s dismissal last month by Transnet’s new board. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.