The ANC’s integrity commission says it can’t, and won’t, compel the party to take any action against members implicated in wrongdoing — despite having stronger powers to intervene in cases of alleged misconduct. Last year the ANC’s national executive committee (NEC) resolved to give the integrity commission more teeth by making its recommendations binding. This year the party announced it had put in place new terms of reference to strengthen the commission’s function. But commission chairperson George Mashamba told the Mail & Guardian that, although the commission did have some level of increased power, which would make it difficult for wrongdoers to avoid being held accountable, the structure could not compel the ANC to take action on its recommendations. Last month Mashamba and his fellow commissioners held a workshop with their predecessors in the structure to conduct an official handover and agree on the renewed functions. This included an agreement that any member implicated in wrongdoing had to appear before the commission or face disciplinary action. Recently, however, the commission has seen resistance to its interventions, despite having more authority. Last week Mashamba’s commission handed over a report on the VBS Mutual Bank looting saga to the NEC. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.