Two and a half months after the listeriosis outbreak was declared over, Enterprise Food products are making a slow comeback to the market, according to its parent company, Tiger Brands, despite speculation during the crisis that the brand might never recover from the fallout. Although the Enterprise Polokwane processed meat factory remains closed, Tiger Brands reopened its Germiston plant last month and Enterprise bacon and pork sausages are once again making their way on-to retail shelves. The Polokwane plant was identified as the source of the lethal ST-6 strain of the bacteria responsible for the outbreak, which killed 216 people and infected more than 1 000. In September, Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi declared the outbreak over after the number of infections declined to pre-outbreak levels. According to him, more than 5 800 tonnes of affected food had been recalled and destroyed in response to the outbreak. Consumers have “enthusiastically” welcomed Enterprise sausages and bacon back, according to the company’s corporate communications director, Navashnee Naicker. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.