Large energy users have flagged the risk of production disruptions and, ultimately, job losses if Sunday’s load shedding, caused by Eskom’s worsening operational problems, intensifies. At the same time, analysts have warned that Eskom’s faltering operations are likely to worsen its already precarious financial state. In its latest financial statements for the year ending in March 2018, Eskom revealed that, besides the losses of R2.3-billion, the cash it receives from its operations is not enough to cover its debt servicing costs. Its struggling operations, outlined at its systems status update last week, are likely to aggravate this. Eskom’s coal stockpiles at several power stations have reached critical lows, requiring an urgent short-term procurement of four million tonnes to bring stockpiles at all stations up to the required levels. The utility is also planning for the increased use of its open-cycle gas turbines (OCGTs) to reduce the risk of load shedding and forecasts it will spend an additional R1-billion by March 2019 to run them. Eskom has launched a nine-point plan to improve generation capacity, which includes spending another R1.5-billion to improve the performance of its new plants, Medupi and Kusile. Nevertheless, large users remain concerned that its financial and technical problems, particularly uncontrollable events such as heavy rain, which dampen its coal stocks, could again trigger load shedding. “Our members all have plans in place to mitigate the impact of possible power reductions but, because we are reliant on Eskom, these plans unfortunately all result in shut or reduced production and ultimately job losses,” said Tsakani Mthombeni, the chairperson of the Energy Intensive Users Group (EIUG). “In the medium- to longer-term, industry will pursue power options outside of Eskom to protect its position.” The utility has applied for additional increases in the electricity price in its fourth multiyear price determination application, seeking a 15% tariff hike each year for the coming three years. But Mthombeni said the economy simply could not sustain further Eskom “price shocks”. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.