South Africa’s large companies spent about R9.7-million on corporate social investment (CSI) in 2018, the bulk of which went to projects or causes in education, social development and health. CSI expenditure was 7% higher than the R9.1-million spent in 2017, and after accounting for inflation, it also had the first real increase in social responsibility spend in five years, according to the CSI and sustainability consultancy Trialogue. In the 21st edition of Trialogue’s Business in Society Handbook, the consultancy found that 92% of the companies surveyed spent money on education, which accounted for 44% of their social spend. But this is less than the 2014 record figure, when education accounted for 49% of social expenditure. Cathy Duff, the director at Trialogue, said education had consistently remained the biggest social expenditure item. “It fluctuates by a few percentage points each year, but I think it sits at around half of spend and it’s where most companies are investing because companies need these skills for their future employees and economic pipelines.” Social development was the second-most supported sector, which received funding from 74% of the companies surveyed, while health received funding from 53% of the companies. Seventy-four companies and 254 nonprofit organisations participated in the survey. Of the companies surveyed by Trialogue, 62% reported an increase in CSI expenditure in 2018, 24% reported a decrease and 14% said expenditure remained unchanged. Duff said the most common reason companies increased CSI spending was when projects required it, which differed from previous years when increases were linked to profits. “Interestingly, those who reported a decrease this year said it was due to falling profits. “So you can see that there’s a tough economic environment that has led to some companies reducing spend, but more companies actually increased spend,” she said. Projects in urban and peri-urban areas received 57% of CSI expenditure; rural areas received 39%. “The finding is quite encouraging because almost 40% of expenditure is going to rural areas. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.