City of Cape Town officials are deadlocked over how to release municipal-owned land for social housing, paralysing the release of five prime locations for affordable housing in and around the city bowl. A trail of emails and damning reports seen by the Mail & Guardian reveal how a dispute by three city departments over a legal technicality have brought the delivery of well-located social housing to a near standstill. The property management department and the immovable property adjudication committee (IPAC) are the authorities responsible for managing city-owned property and recommending to the council what city-owned land can be transferred. Brett Herron, a lawyer and the former Democratic Alliance and mayoral committee member for urban development and transport, has alleged that this dispute over a legal technicality is a smokescreen for IPAC and property management to deliberately block social housing. “This is about the blockages that have been put in place,” Herron said. Since he resigned last week, he has been on a furious campaign to point the blame at the DA for the shortage of social housing in Cape Town’s inner city. Documents show that officials in property management and the IPAC were turning away proposals for land transfer before they even reached those politicians Herron has claimed are responsible for the bottleneck. A progress report, dated September 4 2018, includes six sites in Woodstock and Salt River that have been identified for social housing and mixed development use. Five of these projects have ground to a halt because of a dispute about the legalities of how the city should dispose of its land, according to the report. On the one side of the stand-off is the IPAC and property management and on the other is the transport development authority department, under which social housing falls. The dispute is about at what point in the process a feasibility study of a “mixed-use” development is required. In the progress report, this legal confusion has been referred to by the social housing officials as the “chicken and egg dilemma”. The progress report, authored by social housing officials, was submitted because a spat was brewing between Herron’s transport development authority department — where social housing officials work — and the IPAC and property management. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.