Minister of Public Enterprises Pravin Gordhan will meet with Public Protector Busiswe Mkhwebane on Wednesday after being subpoenaed to answer questions around the retirement and reinstatement of a former top South African Revenue Service (Sars) official in 2010. Lawyers for the minister, in a statement on Saturday, said that Mkhewabe was involved in a preliminary investigation into allegations that were similar to those that Gordhan faced in 2016 when he was the subject of a criminal investigations by the Hawks. These allegations concerned the early retirement of a former top SARS official Ivan Pillay and his subsequent re-employment by the tax agency as deputy commissioner in 2010. The charges against Gordhan were withdrawn by the National Prosecuting Authority on October 31 2016. But Gordhan’s lawyers said that, after the charges were withdrawn, a complaint against the minister was lodged with the Public Protector in late 2016. They did not say who lodged the complaint, “ [...] it was alleged that the approval by Minister Gordhan of Mr Pillay’s early retirement amounted to maladministration, dishonest and improper conduct by the Minister in dealing with public funds.” Mkhwebane then sent a letter to Gordhan on February 5 2018 asking for his response. “We wrote to the Public Protector on 16 February 2018, expressly stating that we require that we be provided the particulars and evidence of the alleged dishonesty and impropriety on the part of Minister Gordhan,” wrote Gordhan’s lawyers in a statement. “To date, such evidence and particulars have not been provided, but for a letter from the Office of the Public Protector dated 28 February 2018, indicating that the Office was in the process of conducting a preliminary investigation as contemplated in section 7(1)(a) of the Public Protector Act, 1994.” The Office of the Public Protector did not immediately respond t a request for comment. Gordhan’s lawyers said that, while they were considering whether they were obliged to respond to the Public Protector in view of the fact that no evidence or particulars had been provided, the Public Protector “proceeded to issue a subpoena on 01 October 2018 for the Minister to appear before her on 14 November 2018.” “Any communication that suggests that Minister Gordhan has not responded to the Public Protector’s enquiries between February and July 2018 — or that ‘responses were not forthcoming’ — is simply deceptive, false and incorrect. The Minister is yet to receive any particulars and/or evidence of maladministration, dishonesty or impropriety referred to in the Public Protector’s initial correspondence of 5 February 2018 and her subpoena of 01 October 2018,” they said. His legal team said that Gordhan would “nonetheless appear before the Public Protector in response to the subpoena. — Fin24 Gordhan Subpoena Lawyer’s Letter by Mail and Guardian on Scribd 