It has been two weeks since the murder of Durban ANC councillor S’bu Maphumulo in what Police Minister Bheki Cele has described as a “well-orchestrated hit” and the police appear no closer to arresting his killers. Also apparently unravelling fast is the narrative put forward by the ANC leadership in the city and the province that the Umlazi councillor’s death may have been related to a march to his office earlier in the day. Activists from civic movement Abahlali baseMjondolo in the ward, who were involved in that protest march, were detained and questioned by the police in the days following. They have since been released, but they claim they were beaten during interrogation and one of the march organisers has himself allegedly been the target of an assassination attempt since his release from detention. Maphumulo, elected in 2016 as councillor for Ward 88, which includes two informal settlements and a section of RDP houses, was gunned down on October 18 in Umlazi’s V Section. The 32-year-old former eThekwini regional executive committee member of the ANC Youth League had been attending a meeting. Soon after it finished he was shot by two men who pulled up alongside his car, in which he was sitting. Maphumulo was hit several times in the head and died at the scene. At the time of his murder, ANC eThekwini regional secretary Bheki Ntuli said they were “disturbed to learn that, before his death, some people had threatened to burn down his house”. The party’s provincial spokesperson, Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu, also took a similar tack, saying Maphumulo had received death threats from marchers who had been excluded from a housing project in the ward. Maphumulo had a history of conflict with Abahlali, whose leaders last year described him as a “gangster” and accused him of attempting to disrupt their activities using hitmen and members of the police. After a confrontation last July, Maphumulo was arrested for possession of an unlicensed firearm after allegedly storming a meeting convened by Abahlali at Silver City, which falls within the ward, and firing several shots in the air. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.