Proposed banking legislation to allow more scrutiny of politically exposed people, including senior government officials, is one of the reasons the treasury found itself isolated and under attack, said former finance minister Pravin Gordhan. In his affidavit before the Zondo commission into state capture, Gordhan details how some of his own Cabinet colleagues resisted — and even attacked — treasury for looking into dodgy dealings. He did not name the colleagues. They also put pressure on treasury to dump crucial amendments to the Financial Intelligence Centre Act (Fica), which would give government more power to scrutinise the banking affairs of individuals considered to be politically exposed persons, including politicians and connected business people. Other ministers sought to wrestle the Finance Intelligence Centre (FIC) from treasury, he said. After resistance from then-president Jacob Zuma, which resulted in litigation, the amendment Bill was passed into law in May by then finance minister Malusi Gigaba. Ironically, it was the scrutiny of the movement of the controversial Gupta family’s money under laws that already existed that led to the beginning of the fall of state capture. In December 2015 and early 2016 South Africa’s four main commercial banks — First National Bank, Absa, Nedbank and Standard Bank — informed the family they could no longer bear the risk of carrying their bank accounts, as well as those of their businesses. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.