Wednesday. The sun isn’t up yet, so there’s time for a bit of a ponder before the day gets serious. The day is going to be tight, as Wednesdays are, but there’s still time to marshal my thoughts before starting work. At least I won’t have to factor in sitting around waiting for President Cyril Ramaphosa to fire Malusi Gigaba, given that Dickgrabber had fired himself as home affairs minister the afternoon before, saving the larney the trouble and for the first time in his political career doing something that at least resembles the honourable thing. The fiendish easterly that’s been howling since Monday morning like Democratic Alliance chief whip John Steenhuisen during presidential question time in the National Assembly isn’t showing any sign of letting up, so a dip in the ocean before work is out. The ocean will be there tomorrow — this is, after all, Durban, so there’s no need to spend the morning dousing myself in methylated spirits — or my own urine if the lifesavers aren’t on duty yet — to kill the bluebottle stings that are guaranteed if I hit the water before the wind changes. I got a swim in on Sunday afternoon, so that will have to keep me going until the wind drops. I check my mobile. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.