Revenue gained from the health-promotion levy shows that South Africans are paying the cost to keep on drinking their favourite sugary drinks, although worldwide trends indicate that, over time, they are likely to move towards lower-sugar options. The idea of a sugar tax was first raised in the 2016 budget speech by then finance minister Pravin Gordhan. But the tax, which specifically targets sugar-sweetened beverages, was delayed by the industry, which pushed back and debated its potential pros and cons. The treasury touted it as a way of tackling obesity; in 2016, the World Health Organisation estimated that 28.3% of South African adults were obese, which is the highest incidence of obesity in sub-Saharan Africa, outstripping Botswana, which is second, by almost 10%. But the Beverage Association of South Africa (BevSA), which represents the drinks producers that are affected by the tax, argued vociferously against it, estimating that it would reduce the gross domestic product by R1.85-billion and lead to job losses. The association also argued that, although the tax might decrease consumption, “there is no evidence that it will yield the desired effect on the reduction of obesity and noncommunicable disease levels”. Eventually, a tax of 2.1c per gram of sugar per 100ml was introduced for drinks that contain more than four grams of sugar per 100ml. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.