As ANC branches prepare to compile their lists of public representatives, the national executive committee (NEC) has set guidelines for the process and encouraged members to ensure president Cyril Ramaphosa, deputy president David Mabuza and party chairperson Gwede Mantashe feature as the top three on the parliamentary list. The three are the only ones in the ANC’s national executive whose positions are not permanent and qualify them for deployment to Parliament. The decision to set guidelines for the process is believed to have been sparked by concerns that factional battles fuelled in the lead-up to the ANC’s 2017 elective conference might continue to play themselves out in the list nominations process. Already provinces that feel slighted by Mabuza’s sudden withdrawal of support for Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma in the succession race have threatened not to nominate him. This would prove embarrassing for Mabuza as it would result in someone else executing the duties of deputy president of the country. A member of the ANC’s national working committee (NWC) said during a special sitting of the NEC last week that party leaders agreed on the need to manage parts of the nominations process to ensure unity ahead of elections. “All of us will now have a common programme. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.