The ANC in KwaZulu-Natal has moved to prevent Ramaphosa-bashing at former president Jacob Zuma’s court appearance on Friday by taking Black First Land First (BLF) and other groups off the official programme for supporters outside the high court in Pietermaritzburg. The ANC has “requested” organisers to keep the BLF and other groupings that have been supporting Zuma at court from using the platform to tear into the ANC and President Cyril Ramaphosa, as has been the case in earlier appearances. Conscious of the impending national and provincial elections, the ANC in the province wants to halt any potential backlash from Zuma’s supporters at the polls next May and to stop electoral opponents from using the court appearances to punt their own campaigns. ANC MPL Bishop Vusi Dube of the National Interfaith Council of South Africa — which is hosting the night vigil ahead of Zuma’s appearance, an on-day march and a programme during and afterward — said he would ensure that the events outside the court were not used by other parties for “bashing the ANC and the president”. Dube, who expects ANC secretary general Ace Magashule to attend the case along with the party’s KwaZulu-Natal leaders, said the BLF and other groups had been excluded from preparations. “They will be there but not in terms of the programme. They will not be there as speakers,” Dube said. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.