The Joburg Film Festival: The festival will screen a selection of African and international films, which include documentaries, feature films and animations. Details: The festival runs from November 9 to 17.
Screening will be at various places around the city, including The Zone and Cinema Nouveau in Rosebank, The Bioscope in Maboneng, Maponya Mall as well as community centres such as Kings in Alexandra. For ticket and schedule information, please visit joburgfilmfestival.co.za Waiting: For this exhibition, veteran artist Sam Nhlengethwa, who is known for his timeless collages of social South Africa, turns his attention to the state of waiting and the many ways this is part of the condition of being human. With subjects ranging from Winnie Mandela to blue-collar workers and commuters, the works bring forth a consciousness about something that is shared by all of us across time. Details: From November 8 at the Goodman Gallery, 3rd floor, Fairweather House, 176 Sir Lowry Rd, Woodstock, Cape Town (parking entrance is at the corner of Francis and Nelson streets). For more information, visit www.goodman-gallery.com The Bubbly, Oyster and Seafood Festival: It’s not every day that the dry landscape of Pretoria and its surrounds get to indulge in the fruits of the sea. This day-long festival, suitable for the whole family, ­promises unlimited wine and bubbly tastings, live music, fresh oysters, seafood stalls, cash bars and a children’s play area. Details: November 11 at the De Kloof Restaurant in Waterkloof Golf Estate, Pretoria. Tickets cost R145 for adults, which includes a crystal bubbly glass. For more information, visit www.dekloofrestaurant.co.za Pantone Sundays Party: This colour-coded theme party asks guests to wear the colour of the day, drawn from the season’s palette. This time it’s yellow’s turn. Hosted at the hidden gem that is Razor Charlie, expect Afrobeats, trap, house and lounge music topped off with a little bossa nova. Details: November 11 at the venue in Johannesburg’s interior design district, Kramerville. Dress code is yellow. For more information search for #PantoneSundays or follow @pantonesundays and @FeelGoodSeries on Instagram. Vuma Levin and Sibusiso Mashiloane: Composer and guitarist Vuma Levin’s tool-mixing genre bending music that plays along the spectrum of hip-hop, pop, contemporary jazz, marabi and Nguni-Sotho choral and goard bow music, is the main attraction at the Sophiatown Heritage centre on Friday. On Saturday, jazz pianist Sibusiso “Mash” Mashiloane will perform his fusion of traditional and contemporary Southern African sounds. Details: November 9 and 10 from 8pm on both days at 71-73 Toby Street, Sophiatown, Johannesburg. Guests are encouraged to bring their own drinks and snacks; glasses and ice will be provided. To book tickets call 083 550 7170 or visit Sophiatownthemix.com Composer and guitarist Vuma Levin, is the main attraction at the Sophiatown Heritage centre