Eskom’s latest request for a 15% tariff hike each year for the next three years, on top of revenue clawbacks, means rising electricity prices are likely to exacerbate its declining sales, energy experts say. The treasury also expects economic growth to decline if the steep increases are granted and has warned that households and companies will go off-grid to get around them. Eskom, in its latest multi-year price determination application (MYPD4), recently applied to the National Energy Regulator of South Africa (Nersa) for the 15% increases. At the same time, it has made another regulatory clearing account (RCA) application for the fifth year of the MYPD3 of R21-billion. The RCA is part of the MYPD methodology and allows Eskom to adjust for the over- or under-recovery of revenue in any year of a tariff decision. In its latest RCA application, most of the money Eskom is seeking to recover was lost because of declining electricity sales. Both the MYPD4 and the new RCA application follow a recent decision by Nersa to let Eskom claw back R32.69-billion for previous MYPD3 years. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.