Suspended Rail Safety Regulator (RSR) chief executive Nkululeko Poya has revealed that he instructed investigators to determine which board members at the regulator were “actively acting against him”. Poya’s admission forms part of an urgent interdict launched at the labour court in October, where he sought to have disciplinary proceedings against him set aside. The interdict was heard in October but was dismissed and his disciplinary hearing started in Pretoria on Monday. Included in the 13 misconduct charges against him is an allegation that he commissioned private investigations into current and former board members as well as a Mail & Guardian journalist, Athandiwe Saba. Poya is also charged with gross misconduct for delaying the granting of a safety permit for the Bombela Operating Company which manages the Gautrain, irregular human resource practices and failing to monitor the RSR’s office lease agreement. In the labour court application, Poya says two members of the board “undermine[d] the RSR” and himself, which is why he took “necessary steps” to protect the organisation. In March, the M&G reported how an RSR official obtained Saba’s private cellphone records after she wrote a story implicating Poya in corruption. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.