When disgraced Home Affairs Minister Malusi Gigaba resigned on Tuesday, President Cyril Ramaphosa’s strategy of allowing the courts and institutions of oversight to dictate the pace of his cleanout of government paid off. Gigaba tendered his resignation letter the day before Ramaphosa would have fired him in line with an order issued by public protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane over Gigaba’s lies under oath in a court case over the Oppenheimers’ Fireblade private terminal. A similar approach had been successful in dealing with other officials implicated in state capture, including former South African Revenue Service head Tom Moyane and National Prosecuting Authority officials Nomgcobo Jiba and Lawrence Mrwebi, all of whom were “processed” by the courts or public inquiries before Ramaphosa acted against them. Ramaphosa’s supporters in the ANC this week hailed the move, saying that the approach of allowing public, political and legal pressure to build before acting was effective. “This is smart. Ramaphosa is using others, the opposition and the structures of the state, to clean house for him,” said a KwaZulu-Natal provincial executive committee (PEC) member who was involved in Ramaphosa’s presidential campaign. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.