Embattled airline SAA could be flying into a spot of bother as divisions at the top of the state-owned entity are threatening to scupper its turnaround. The Mail & Guardian has learned that relations between chief executive Vuyani Jarana and the board have deteriorated, and he has asked government’s shareholder representative, Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan, to intervene. SAA’s financial situation is dire. On Tuesday Jarana told MPs that SAA’s turnaround had been pushed back to 2021 and that the airline will require R17-billion in bailouts by next March for working capital and to repay R9-billion in maturing loans, and that R3.5-billion was required as early as December. The M&G has reliably learned that Jarana avoided an attempt to remove him three weeks ago when three of SAA’s nine non-executive directors backed a proposal to suspend him. A government source with knowledge of Jarana’s views on the impasse said the former Vodacom executive believes he is being hounded by three board members, Martin Kingston, Thandeka Mgoduso and Peter Tshisevhe, for questioning legal contracts given to Tshisevhe’s law firm, TGR Attorneys, and for his refusal to approve the extension of former interim chief finance officer Robert Head’s contract. Jarana refused to comment. At the time of going to print SAA’s board and executives were locked in a meeting, and it is speculated that this could result in major developments. Tshisevhe denied knowledge of any lobbying of Gordhan or tension between himself and Jarana. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.