A looming court battle between a local municipality and a service provider is threatening a five-year-old rural electrification initiative for thousands of Limpopo residents. The ambitious project involved an innovative business model, based on long-term financial commitments rather than on current available budgets. It was meant to accelerate the electrification of rural areas but it has been stalled for more than a year. But just two weeks after the Fetakgomo Greater Tubatse Local Municipality and Eskom, in an attempt to rescue the project after it garnered national attention, announced the recommencement of a project to electrify nearly 10 000 households, Lufuno Mphaphuli is seeking an interdict to stop the work. The businessperson, after electrifying 7 500 households near Burgersfort in Limpopo in just over a year, is fighting to hold on to the R300-million pilot project, which has been bedevilled by political instability in the municipality. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.