There; Not There by Karen Cronje: Using nuclear accidents that resulted in the obliteration of humanity in a short time, the Cape Town-based artist uses painting to weigh up the idea of presence and absence against each other. Details: The exhibition is taking place at 99 Loop Gallery, 99 Loop Street, Cape Town, until November 24.
For more information, visit 99loop.co.za Chilahaebolae: Written and directed by poet and playwright Kgafela oa Magogodi, this satirical play tells the story of a growing distance between two friends. The title means dirt does not kill. In it, a jackal named Phukubje searches for his estranged friend Mpja, which means dog, only to realise that the brotherhood they shared is no more. Details: The play is running at the Soweto Theatre, corner of Bolani Link and Bolani Road, Jabulani, Soweto, until November  11. Tickets cost R100 and can be bought from webticket.co.za. For more information, visit sowetotheatre.com In These Waters: The play is the work of the University of KwaZulu-Natal’s Contemporary Performance honours students. Nomvula lives on land. Her friend Makhi lives in water. Through their friendship, the play explores the intricate ways that water is used to make meaning of existence. Details: The show will run until November 2 at the Hexagon Theatre, 10 Golf Road, Scottsville, Pietermaritzburg. Tickets cost R30 to R50 and can be bought from the theatre’s box office. For more information, visit hexagon.ukzn.ac.za Dark Cell: This play is inspired by the political prisoners on Robben Island. Featuring Standard Bank Young Artist Award recipients Themba Mbuli and Fana Tshabalala, the characters use historical references to explore the idea of mental imprisonment. Details: The play will run at the Market Theatre, 56 Margaret Mcingana Street, Johannesburg, until November 4. Tickets cost R90 and can be bought from the theatre’s box office or webticket.co.za. The show contains scenes of nudity and the age recommendation is 16. For more information, visit markettheatre.co.za