Nearly R2 out of the almost R17 paid for every litre of fuel, a levy which has increased by more than 300% in the past 10 years, now goes directly to the insolvent and dysfunctional Road Accident Fund (RAF). Although the RAF levy already makes up 36% of all government-imposed levies on the fuel price, further increases are likely because the fund now has a monthly average of R9-billion in claims in arrears. In an average month, the fund will receive R4-billion from two billion litres of fuel sold, economist Mike Schussler has estimated. According to the fund’s financial statements, total revenue for the 2017-2018 financial year amounted to R37.34-billion (up from last year’s R33.34-billion). The RAF’s net deficit increased sharply to R206-billion by the end of the 2017-2018 financial year. During last month’s medium-term budget policy statement, Finance Minister Tito Mboweni warned that the fund’s liability could grow to R393-billion by 2021-2022. “The RAF will require further large increases to the fuel levy in each of the next three years to manage the short-term liability,” he said. During the 2017-2018 year, Paul Modipa, the general manager of the forensic and investigation department, reported that fraudulent claims amounting to R1.259-billion had been identified before they were paid out. “We have rotten apples within the RAF,” said Modipa. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.