In the queer community the idea is that everything is fine — we are loving and sexing, and the only violence we must fear is from the homophobic outside world. When violence does rear its ugly head in queer spaces it is whittled down to just “dyke drama” and “gay bitchiness” or a sexual misunderstanding that may or may not have gone too far. The constant need to see violence as happening purely across gender lines means there is an underdeveloped understanding of how it manifests within the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and queer/questioning spaces. But, mirroring the exposure witnessed in the #MeToo movement, light is being shed, particularly through the digital realm, on the harm befalling members of the queer community by their own. From instances of domestic violence and emotional and physical abuse to outing sexual predators, the conversations are increasingly coming to the fore. Myths have shrouded the idea of abuse and violence within the queer community, making it more difficult to speak up — and sometimes very difficult to detect from the outside. One of the main myths is that, if there is abuse, especially physical, it must be mutual. Within queer women spaces, there is the idea that one woman cannot physically or sexually assault another. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.