A Twitter spat has erupted between the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) and Democratic Alliance (DA) members of parliament over DA chief whip John Steenhuisen’s qualifications. EFF deputy president Floyd Shivambu and the party’s spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi mocked Steenhuisen on Twitter after a Sunday Times report revealed that Steenhuisen’s highest qualification is matric. The report suggested the DA’s “degree proposal” could be bad news for Steenhuisen. Shivambu tweeted on Sunday: “So @jsteenhuisen doesn’t have a degree or diploma or certificate in anything? His shallowness explains the whole thing.” So @jsteenhuisen doesn’t have a degree or diploma or certificate in anything? His shallowness explains the whole thing. https://t.co/wYEmz5wrLp — Floyd Shivambu (@FloydShivambu) November 25, 2018 Ndlozi tweeted: “Madoda, DA Chief Whip @jsteenhuisen doesn’t have a post-matric qualification? If it were a black leader, this article would have even published his matric results.
So as to tarnish his standing as a chief whip for a serious law-making institution like Parliament #whiteprivilege.” Madoda, DA Chief Whip @jsteenhuisen doesn’t have a post-matric qualification? If it were a black leader, this article would have even published his Matric results. So as to tarnish his standing as a chief whip for a serious law making institution like parliament #whiteprivilege https://t.co/PZjU1hIVQC — Mbuyiseni Ndlozi (@MbuyiseniNdlozi) November 25, 2018 Steenhuisen did not take kindly to the tweets. He tweeted: “Your qualifications have obviously equipped you and your journeymen well for rational debate (beating up journalists) and VBS looting. I would rather be degreeless and honest than qualified and dishonest like you.” Your qualifications have obviously equipped you and your journeymen well for rational debate (beating up journalists) and VBS looting. I would rather be degreelesss and honest than qualified and dishonest like you. https://t.co/1fdDi8KuIC — John Steenhuisen MP (@jsteenhuisen) November 25, 2018 Steenhuisen also tweeted: “For all your degrees and qualifications you’re still a bunch of VBS looters and thugs I’m sure those who have suffered as a result of your party’s greed and thuggery have taken cold comfort knowing you had a degree while you betrayed them.” For all your degrees and qualifications you’re still a bunch of VBS looters and thugs I’m sure those who have suffered as a result of your party’s greed and thuggery have taken cold comfort knowing you had a degree while you betrayed them. https://t.co/l1GCkd0gVn — John Steenhuisen MP (@jsteenhuisen) November 25, 2018 Shivambu hit back at Steenhuisen’s “crazy” allegations about VBS looting. “This again is a perfect reflection of lack of organised knowledge and post-secondary training. You must go to school and stop throwing crazy allegations. School is the topic now. Learn how to focus on the topic: SCHOOL,” Shivambu emphasised. This again is a perfect reflection of lack of organised knowledge and post secondary training. You must go to school and stop throwing crazy allegations. School is the topic now. Learn how to focus on the topic: SCHOOL. — Floyd Shivambu (@FloydShivambu) November 25, 2018 DA leader Mmusi Maimane jumped into the fray in defence of Steenhuisen. “I have worked with a great legislator, a chief whip and a friend. He is the finest Chief whip of the opposition in Parli. A constitutionalist and a fierce defender of freedom. He will continue to serve our party and the people of South Africa @jsteenhuisen,” he tweeted. I have worked with a great legislator, a chief whip and a friend. He is the finest Chief whip of the opposition in Parli. A constitutionalist and a fierce defender of freedom. He will continue to serve our party and the people of South Africa @jsteenhuisen https://t.co/Gp1ONBM8n7 — Mmusi Maimane (@MmusiMaimane) November 25, 2018 Steenhuisen’s colleagues in the DA also joined in the spat. DA MP Phumzile Van Damme, said: “It’s list season. We call it electionitis. People are worried about their seats & seeing who they can eliminate. Nothing to see here, typical. @jsteenhuisen is a great Chief Whip, with more talent & knowledge about Parly than many with a dozen qualifications. Move along.” — News24 It’s list season. We call it electionitis.  People are worried about their seats & seeing who they can eliminate. Nothing to see here, typical.  @jsteenhuisen is a great Chief Whip, with more talent & knowledge about Parly than many with a dozen qualifications. Move along