The so-called Dros rapist is reportedly still waiting to be admitted to the Weskoppies psychiatric hospital. He is meant to be evaluated to determine whether he could be held accountable for raping a 7-year-old girl in the bathroom of a Dros restaurant in Pretoria in September. The case that was expected to be heard on Wednesday was postponed owing to the shortage of beds at Weskoppies. The man is meant to be admitted for 30 days’ observation but is reportedly still on a waiting list. During his previous court appearance on November 1, the court granted an application brought by the State and the defence to have the 20-year-old accused referred for mental observation. Additionally, the court granted an application by the defence to appoint an additional psychiatrist and clinical psychologist making up a team of four experts who will observe the accused while he is in Weskoppies, which is a government psychiatrist institution. Legal aid lawyer Riaan du Plessis, for the accused, told the court there was a need to explore the mental state of the accused at the time of the alleged incident. He added that the accused was diagnosed with bipolar disorder in 2013 and has been using drugs since he was 14 years old. It was put on record that the accused had previously undergone rehabilitation for substance abuse. “He also tried to commit suicide because of the severe depression of having bipolar,” Du Plessis said.State advocate Sanet Jacobson told the court it was in the interests of justice that the accused be referred to Weskoppies for psychiatric observation. “[His] criminal capacity might be a relevant issue to pursue because a substance was found on him,” Jacobson said.The accused was at the restaurant where he allegedly followed the 7-year-old child to a bathroom and raped her. A video, taken moments after the alleged incident, showed a man covered in blood and angry patrons berating him.The accused has not yet brought an application for his release on bail, nor has he pleaded to the charges.
— News24