International Relations Minister Lindiwe Sisulu has criticised former politician and businessperson Roelf Meyer for holding a private meeting with opposition parties from the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), saying it could jeopardise the government’s efforts to ensure free and fair election in that country. Last week, Meyer, through his nonprofit organisation, the In Transformation Initiative, held a gathering in Pretoria with the leaders of the Union for Democracy and Social Progress, Together for Change and the Movement for the Liberation of the Congo (MLC). The purpose of the four-day meeting was to discuss ways to ensure peaceful elections in the DRC in December and to aid opposition parties to rally behind one candidate. In the past year, the main opposition contenders have been nullified. MLC leader Jean-Pierre Bemba has been disqualified because of a previous conviction and Moise Katumbi from the Together for Change coalition is in exile after being convicted because of a property deal. President Joseph Kabila has stayed in power for two years since his term expired, after many election delays. The South African government was not made aware of the meeting until the last minute, despite South Africa being the leader of the Southern African Development Community’s team tasked with overseeing successful elections in the DRC. The gathering has also been criticised for being too one-sided because representatives from the ruling People’s Party for Reconstruction and Democracy were excluded at what is seen as a sensitive time before the DRC heads to the polls. This week, Sisulu said she had only been made aware of the meeting on the morning it was scheduled to start. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.