Minister Malusi Gigaba’s “romantic” video, Adam Catzavelos racist rant and the Gupta bots have one thing in common: the freedom South Africans have online. Last week Freedom House, a United States-based nongovernmental organisation, released its annual report, which said that South Africa is ranked as one of the countries with the most internet freedom in the world. South Africa ranked eighth, preceded by Iceland (in first place), Estonia, Canada, Germany, Australia, the United States and the United Kingdom. Internet freedom is measured by the prevalence of censorship laws, surveillance programmes, ­government hacks, blocking of social media and other ways of limiting or manipulating citizens’ freedom of speech. China, Iran, Ethiopia and Syria have the lowest internet freedom. The report said that in the past year internet freedom declined in 26 countries and improved in 19 countries, out of 65 analysed. According to the Freedom Housereport, neither the state nor other third parties actively block or filter online content in South Africa, leaving citizens to monitor the web for themselves and to hold accountable those who generate content deemed illegal or unethical. It’s also South Africans’ responsibility to become educated to be less susceptible to defamatory content, harassment and even malware. In 2016 it was citizens who took on racist Penny Sparrow’s Facebook post likening black people at a beach to monkeys. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.