The Full Gospel Church in Somkhele burst into song after a long meeting to discuss what to do after a high court judgment, which had ruled against their struggle with Tendele Coal Mining the day before. Young and old rose to their feet, the power of their voices warming the chilly overcast day with the singing of Thina si lwela amalungelo ethu (We are fighting for our rights). The 4 000 residents of 10 villages in KwaZulu-Natal’s Somkhele area, between Hluhluwe-iMfolozi Park and the town of Mtubatuba, began their battle with Tendele after it started mining there in 2007. According to evidence submitted to the court, Somkhele has more than 50% of all open-pit mineable anthracite reserves in the country. Tendele is the principal supplier of anthracite in the country and sells 730 000 tonnes a year to local ferrochrome producers. But the mining operations have been dogged by controversy and opposed by Somkhele residents, who say Tendele violates their environmental, land and traditional rights, and is negatively affecting a way of life that is based on crop and stock farming. The residents, through the Mfolozi Community Environmental Justice Organisation, applied to the court to interdict the company from operating until it complies with all legal and environmental rights regulations. But Judge Rishi Seegobin dismissed the application with costs because the applicants had not presented a proper case. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.