Noted: Created and directed by Julia Burnham, who was mentored by celebrated classical and contemporary dance teacher Adel Blank, Noted examines the ways in which social constructs such as gender inform people’s narratives. Details: The dance piece runs at the Market Theatre, 56 Margaret Mcingana Street (previously Wolhuter), until November 18.
Tickets cost R90 a person and can be purchased from webticket.co.za. For more information visit markettheatre.co.za The Revlon Girl: Set in 1966 after the Aberfan disaster — where a colliery waste tip slid downhill and killed 116 children and 28 adults — this play tells the story of how a visit from a Revlon makeup salesperson brings bereaved mothers together. Details: The play runs until December 1 at the Auto & General Theatre on the Square, Nelson Mandela Square, corner of Rivonia Road and West Street, Sandton. Tickets are R150 a person and can be purchased from computicket.com. For details visit theatreonthesquare.co.za Schalk Bezuidenhout in Snorseun: Renowned for performing alongside Trevor Noah and winning Comics’ Choice awards, Bezuidenhout also took the lead role in the recent film Kanarie. This weekend, lovers of stand-up can look forward to the comedian’s tongue-in-cheek recollections of his encounters in South Africa. Details: Snorseun runs until November 16 at Die Boer, 6 Chenoweth Street, Durbanville, Cape Town. Tickets cost R120 a person. For tickets and information visit dieboer.com Assessing Abstraction: Although colonial South Africans resisted abstraction as a form of expression, many artists continued to make use of it, though its political relevance was hotly debated. This exhibition takes a look at the history of this art form in South Africa. Details: The exhibition is open until February 17 at the Iziko South African National Gallery, Government Avenue, Company’s Garden, Cape Town. Entry costs R15 for children and R30 for adults. For more information visit iziko.org.za/museums/south-african-national-gallery here they passed: In this new installation by Alexandra Karakashian — whose grandfather escaped the 1915 Armenian genocide — see her uses unconventional materials and methods to paint the subjects of exile, migration and the loss of land and home. The works create a space that defies the white cube they are showcased in. Details: here they passed will be on show until November 17 at SMAC Art Gallery, The Palms, 145 Sir Lowry Road, Woodstock, Cape Town. Entrance is free. For more information visit smacgallery.com