Many Steinhoff shareholders who lost close to R200-billion when the global furniture empire was shown to be little more than smoke and mirrors want their money back — but there may be nothing left. Lawyers acting under the banner of the International Steinhoff Litigation Group are leading a class action covering all three jurisdictions Steinhoff operated in, claiming €12-billion, or more than R190-billion, in investor losses. Steinhoff is now worth a mere R8-billion. The class action, which includes 100 institutional and 1 000 retail investors, involves LHL Attorneys in South Africa, TILP Litigation in Germany and Bynkershoek Dispute Resolution in the Netherlands, with support from the global loss recovery law firm DRRT and litigation funder Therium. The class action throws its net wide: 42 parties — including all of Steinhoff and its subsidiaries, auditors Deloitte and Rödl & Partner and the banks Absa, Germany’s Commerzbank and United Kingdom-based Standard Chartered Bank — are named as respondents. The respondents also include more than 30 of Steinhoff’s former and current executives, among them former chief financial officer Ben le Grange, former chairperson Christo Wiese, director Angela Kruger-Steinhoff and founder Bruno Steinhoff. Lawyer Zain Lundell, of LHL attorneys, said they had managed to put together a vehicle that would ensure that investors were properly protected.  Maximillian Weiss, an attorney at TILP Litigation, said, although they understood that they might not be able to recoup all the losses suffered by investors, “by pursuing litigation against the approximately 40 defendants we are convinced were at fault, we drastically increase the likelihood for a reasonable compensation”. Not surprisingly, the architect of the financial shenanigans, Markus Jooste, is on the list. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.