Just two days after Mexico’s Day of the Dead celebrations, in which marching bands and skeletal puppets paraded through city streets, William Kentridge’s video installation, More Sweetly Play the Dance, opened at Centro de las Artes de San Agustín, a mountaintop art centre in the Mexican town of San Agustín Etla. The 15-minute film’s brass-band music and danse macabre were a fitting complement to this annual season honouring those who have died. Kentridge is just one of many Southern African artists whose work forms part of the Crossing Night (Hacer Noche) exhibition taking place around the Mexican city of Oaxaca de Juárez, an area famous for both its deeply moving Day of the Dead celebrations and its many galleries and cultural institutions. Crossing Night, a programme by Idris Naim, a Mexico City-based nonprofit organisation dedicated to the promotion of the arts in Mexico and around the world, includes five exhibition chapters, artist residencies, educational workshops and a talks programme, showing work by artists such as Marlene Dumas, David Goldblatt, Nicholas Hlobo, Jackson Hlungwani, Penny Siopis, Portia Zvavahera, Athi-Patra Ruga and Cinga Samson. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.