Members of Parliament tore into the embattled SABC’s proposed plan to drop at least a third of its programming in an bid to save the organisation’s depleted finances, saying it does not make sense. Changes to programming are just one of the proposed interventions outlined by the struggling entity’s leaders when they appeared before Parliament this week. They could not provide further clarity on the cost-saving initiative at the time of going to print, so it could not be established whether the proposals will affect the state broadcaster’s news offerings as well as any local productions. In an effort to save itself, the SABC, which has reported losses exceeding R1.5-billion in the past two financial years, has proposed a range of drastic actions, which includes shedding just more than 2 00 permanent and freelance jobs. According to the presentation to MPs, the SABC’s losses for the current year to date have topped R323‑million and are forecast to reach R800-million by the end of the financial year. Organised labour is opposed to the proposed plan to cut jobs. The first consultative meeting, in terms of section 189 of the Labour Relations Act, between the unions and the SABC officially kicked off on Wednesday. Section 189 requires employers to demonstrate that they have made efforts to avoid retrenchments. On Tuesday SABC board members told Parliament’s portfolio committee on communications that it has already started to implement a cost-saving strategy, which has enabled the broadcaster to save millions of rands over the past two quarters. “A number of cost-saving measures have been implemented, but, despite all of those, we are still faced with what I call ‘Day Zero’,” SABC board member Mathatha Tsedu told the committee. To push home the point, Tsedu spoke about how parts of the SABC headquarters in Auckland Park, Johannesburg, had started to crumble because the costs of maintaining the building had been cut. But the amount of money the SABC has been able to save is a far cry from the amount needed to save it. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.