Eskom is forecasting a pre-tax loss of R15-billion for the year ending March 2019 and it is consumers and taxpayers who will have to help dig it out of this hole, warned the utility’s chairperson, Jabu Mabuza. At its interim results on Wednesday Eskom revealed that it is likely to require some form of financial support from the state (the details of which are yet to be clarified) along with a tariff increase from the National Energy Regulator of South Africa, which the utility has applied for. But analysts say the options Eskom is contemplating are not without their own equally thorny problems, and the treasury has said the government has not agreed to increase Eskom’s existing R350-billion government guarantee facility and that no “injection of equity into Eskom is provided for”. Mabuza told the Mail & Guardian that Eskom was working with government to solve the utility’s debt burden and he highlighted the “severe financial difficulty” that Eskom is in. “If we do not make significant changes now, Eskom will have even bigger problems of viability. We therefore are faced with some difficult, unavoidable decisions,” he said. Its problems could not be solved by Eskom alone and containing costs would “go some way but is not enough, and neither are tariffs. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.