The desperate state oil company’s ill-conceived bid to refine crude at its gas-to-liquid plant might be the last nail in its coffin Rustenburg Girls’ Junior School dismissed Nozipho Mthembu – but it won’t say why Former State Security Agency minister Bongani Bongo wants to take the speaker of Parliament to court over allegations that he attempted to bribe the evidence leader in the parliamentary inquiry into state capture of state-owned entities last year. ‘We neglect our health. I didn’t take the doctor seriously.
Until I collapsed’ The founders of the annual march are disillusioned with its commercial flavour Carbon dioxide is changing the sea bed and the damage humans will do has not yet been seen The minister has taken issue with a meeting of DRC leaders that excluded the ruling party The National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (Numsa) wants to know why the Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC) has rejected its efforts to register a workers’ party, despite the union’s belief that it has followed all the relevant procedures. A group of women from Colenso’s Inkanyezi township were held in ­custody without bail for more than two months after a peaceful service delivery protest. Suspicion in eThekwini is rife and the police appear to be no closer to apprehending those responsible for the deaths Two businessmen are locked in a battle over shares in a major deal that goes back to 2005 More than 70% of Earth’s last untouched wilderness lies in the territories of just five countries, most of which have alarmed environmentalists with their lukewarm response to climate change. They are more vulnerable than adults and the effect for their wellbeing is life-long For years it seemed to all those people caught in Tracy Morrison’s intricate webs of deceit that she would never be called to account New research says a warmer climate and more storms will lead to more flooding and damage A high court action by two farm tenants in the KwaZulu-Natal Midlands to force municipalities to provide them with water and sanitation is likely to benefit more than 42 000 people in the Umgungundlovu district municipality alone. An international organisation says small-scale farmers are compromised because of red tape and costs Nurses and doctors are hitting the books to save infants’ lives – and it’s working In a country where the pipes can stop short or reaching homes, cheap sachets of water sold on the street could be the unlikely solution filling the gap, but is there a hidden cost? The death toll from South Sudan’s civil war is nearly eight times higher than previously thought The arrest of a top opposition leader has plunged the Indian Ocean islands into chaos once again The 2018 Mo Ibrahim African governance index was released this week. It’s not good news Rout in equities and uncertainty over valuations sees money flowing into the safety of US bonds Think back not too many years and it seems we have floated from bubble to bubble, cases of out-of-whack prices being recorded in eras such as dotcom, subprime and crypto. The Reserve Bank is second in line to apply for liquidation and there is concern this could cause a delay. The increases it wants will drive down sales and no one is buying into the parastatal’s claims that it can counter this Nubank is the online bank with the greatest number of clients outside of Asia. Fellow Brazilian startup 99 is a platform that connects 300 000 taxi drivers and chauffeurs to provide a competitive service in which passengers pay less while drivers earn more. Economic inequality is fuelling a growing sense of tribalism, which populist politicians exploit — just take a look at Team Trump Its credibility is at stake and an open, all-encompassing approach needs to be taken The past 18 months have been gruelling for the country’s official opposition We should fully expect that the IMF’s main focus would be our costly civil service and bloated, indebted and dysfunctional state-owned enterprises. Our readers write in about the Democratic Alliance, the Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh and Israel The smart lawyer’s money was on Zuma screwing the system – and Gigaba, well, himself South Africans could embrace an authoritarian state if the government fails to address current social and economic issues Women also abuse men, siblings abuse siblings, parents abuse children and it’s all bad FIFTH COLUMN: A clever plan for silly season “ We are moving into silly season with Movember (mens’ very own costume party: “Look, I’m Tom Selleck”) starting the countdown to Christmas and then, of course, the great crescendo: New Year.” Transformation began 50 years ago The first bid to place Africa at the heart of literary studies took place in Kenya Modes of inhlonipho (respect) are the ways in which “ways of being” are promoted, implemented and preserved. There; Not There by Karen Cronje, Chilahaebolae and In These Waters. Harambe, Tswaka, Jabba and all the hits by HHP; When It Falls by Zero 7; and Edward’s Menagerie Buhlebezwe Siwani’s latest exhibition grew out of a trek and conversations with several women Dickies fanatics get their own store There’s always that one uncle in black families. The malume who sports a gold chain, uses a pair of balled-up stockings to shine his two-tone Brentwood shoes and only speaks tsotsitaal. Gaseroen Samuels laughs as he recalls the years of fun he had in Cape Town’s District Six with his large, all-queer posse. The fashion designer’s latest collection of the conservative conceals as it reveals The concept of megacities comes out of a colonial and global taxonomy of cities of the world. Those who have read Tsitsi Dangarembga’s Nervous Conditions and The Book of Not, prequels to This Mournable Body, will remember Tambudzai, protagonist and narrator. The genre grew out of Southern Africa’s past and reflects our present and our desired future Just as preparing and eating food binds us, so do visits to markets with fresh, unpackaged products Solinas must ensure Chiefs produce results consistently, injuries notwithstanding A 10-year strategic partnership is an acid test for how far down a pseudo sport will bow to Saudi money The tour abroad will test whether the bid to develop women’s rugby since the disastrous 2014 World Cup has paid off