The final death knell sounded for defunct VBS Mutual Bank this week as the prudential authority of the South African Reserve Bank applied to liquidate it. But the central bank is not the first to take this step. The Mahikeng local municipality had already applied to the Limpopo division of the high court to wind up VBS on October 19 and the matter is to be heard on November 6, a week ahead of the Reserve Bank’s application. It remains to be seen what the courts will make of this, and whether it will unduly delay the closing of the bank and the recovery of lost funds. The Reserve Bank would not comment as the matter was “sub judice”, whereas the municipality did not respond to several calls and emailed questions seeking comment. VBS’s closure has been looming since an investigation, commissioned by the Reserve Bank and undertaken by advocate Terry Motau, found that almost R2-billion has disappeared from the mutual bank in a web of fraud and corruption. Motau recommended in his report the “urgent” winding up of VBS, as there was “no prospect of saving” the mutual bank. The chief executive of the prudential authority, Kuben Naidoo, argued in the application to the high court in Pretoria this week that only the authority could apply to close VBS. “It is the prudential authority which should, in the context of VBS, be in control of the process of terminating the curatorship of VBS and of placing it in winding-up,” he said. Naidoo said the municipality had not complied with the Mutual Banks Act, which requires that a liquidation application for a mutual bank must first be lodged with the prudential authority. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.