As a debate raged this week about the qualifications of MPs, the Mail & Guardian tracked down the educational qualifications of more than half of South Africa’s public representatives and, overall, they are a fairly well-educated group. But many MPs insisted that educational qualifications are not the key to a seat in Parliament — being a good politician is what counts. According to the People’s Assembly, a nonprofit group that tracks MPs and seeks to promote accountability, there are a total of 449 representatives. Parliament seats 400 members and the other 49 are permanent members of the National Council of Provinces. Of those 449, the M&G was able to track down 247 members’ education details, which reflect a fairly educated spectrum of doctors, lawyers and some theologians. Of the 247 members, 9% have PhDs, and the most popular fields are philosophy (22%) and law (9%). This week the Democratic Alliance came out in defence of the party’s chief whip, John Steenhuisen, who does not have a tertiary education. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.