The head of the Johannesburg state attorney’s office and an advocate from the Johannesburg Bar have been suspended and are being investigated for collusion, involving the settling of a case for millions when they were instructed not to do so. This follows a scathing judgment, which described their conduct as “apparently fraudulent, disgraceful and deceitful”. In July, the minister of police approached the high court in Johannesburg to halt the execution of a judgment that ordered the ministry to pay more than R34-million for the alleged wrongful arrest, detention and shooting of a citizen. The judgment was delivered in February when the Johannesburg state attorney, Kgosi Lekabe, and advocate Hassan Kajee conceded the liability of the South African Police Service (SAPS) in a R34-million claim, although the police said it had given express instructions to defend the claim. In August, Judge Thifhelimbilu Mudau found in favour of the SAPS’s application to stop the payment. He lambasted Lekabe and Kajee for not responding to the allegations. “The allegations made by the applicant [SAPS] … are not only serious but are made against officers of the court. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.