COMMENT My family was murdered before I could tie my shoes. As a boy in Sierra Leone, years that should have been carefree and filled with play were spent fighting in someone else’s war.
For me, childhood was a nightmare; escape always seemed impossible. But when the war officially ended in 2002, I began finding ways to recover. One of the most important has been an opportunity I couldn’t have imagined as an angry, illiterate, nine-year-old soldier: school. I am living proof of the transformative power of education. Thanks to hard work and much good fortune, I managed to finish high school and then graduated from university. Now, in just a few months’ time, I will begin graduate classes at the Fordham University School of Law in the United States, an unimaginable destination for most of the former child soldiers in my country. But, throughout my educational journey, one question has nagged me: Why did luck have to play such a crucial role? After all, education is supposed to be a universal human right. If only it were that simple. READ MORE: Motshekga: ‘What we need is money’ Today, more than 260-million children are out of school, and more than 500-million boys and girls who do attend classes are not receiving a quality education, as the International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity discovered. By 2030, more than half the world’s school-age children — about 800 million — will not have the basic skills needed to thrive or secure a job in the workplace of the future. Addressing this requires money and, although education may be the best investment a government can make to ensure a better future for its people, financing for education worldwide is far too low. In fact, it accounts for just 10% of total international development aid, down from 13% a decade ago. To put this in perspective, developing countries receive just $10 a child annually in global education support, barely enough to cover the cost of a textbook. In an age of self-driving cars and smart refrigerators, this dearth of funding is unacceptable. I have advocated on behalf of three global education initiatives — the International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity (education commission), the Global Partnership for Education (GPE), and the Education Cannot Wait fund (ECW). I have done so because these organisations are working towards the same goal: to raise funds to make quality education for every child, everywhere, more than a matter of luck. One of the best ways to do this is by supporting the International Finance Facility for Education, an initiative spearheaded by the education commission that could unlock the greatest global investment in education ever recorded. Young people around the world understand what’s at stake. Earlier this month, Global Youth Ambassadors presented a petition, signed by more than 1.5-million children in 80 countries, to United Nations secretary general António Guterres, calling for the UN to support the finance facility. READ MORE: Motshekga airs basic education’s infrastructure budget woes By raising roughly $2-billion in donor guarantees, the finance facility aims to make $8-billion in new funding available to countries that need it most. If adopted widely, the programme could make it possible for developing countries to provide quality education to millions more children, including refugees, young girls and former child soldiers like me. Politicians often say that young people are the leaders of tomorrow. That’s true; we are. But platitudes not backed by financial support are meaningless. Simply put, the world must unite to fund quality education for everyone. The International Finance Facility for Education — which is already backed by the World Bank, regional development banks, GPE, ECW and many UN agencies — is among the best ways to make that happen. Twenty years ago, law school was an impossible dream for me. Today, thanks to hard work, global support and much good fortune, my future is brighter than it has ever been. But my story should not be an exception. To ensure that others can gain a quality education and follow the path that has opened up to me, we must remove luck from the equation. — © Project Syndicate Mohamed Sidibay is a youth representative to the International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity, a peace activist at the Global Partnership for Education, and a former peace ambassador with the My Hero Project