After years and years of complaints by South Africans about high data prices, new offering Rain Mobile is likely to shake up the market with prices as low as just 16% of that of established providers. With prominent business leaders Patrice Motsepe, Michael Jordaan and Paul Harris as lead investors, Rain’s low-price offering may force the big four mobile networks — Vodacom, Cell C, MTN and Telkom — to offer more competitive data prices, an analyst says. “For instance, Vodacom offers 2G for R149; previously this was the price of 1G. It also has tailor-made Vodacom-4U products, which is based on an individual’s data and voice-call usage,” says Onkokame Mothobi, senior researcher at ResearchICTafrica.net (RIA). “In order for operators to keep market shares, the big four will have to respond to Rain’s offers because it is offering cheaper services than most South African players,” he adds. A 100MB bundle costs R5 with Rain; Cell C, MTN and Telkom charge R29. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.