Human Settlements Minister Nomaindia Mfeketo has ordered the appointment of an independent investigator to look into the affairs of the beleaguered Community Schemes Ombudsman Services (CSOS), the body that regulates shared living property arrangements such as body corporates and homeowner associations. The Mail & Guardian understands that Mfeketo is unhappy with a report from the CSOS board about recent controversies,including a dodgy investment of R100-million and the board’s response to the minister on how to handle the matter. Her decision was made despite the board’s resolution last week to institute a forensic investigation into the investment of the funds, which mainly came from levies paid by community schemes and the CSOS’s annual appropriation from Parliament. Two weeks ago the M&G reported how R80-million of the money —which was invested with the embattled VBS Mutual Bank that is under curatorship, without the necessary treasury approvals and outside of the organisation’s investment policy —was written off by the CSOS board. This led to the organisation’s first adverse audit outcome. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.