The social grant saga returns to court on Wednesdayas civilrights group the Black Sash and the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) fight to halt deductions from the accounts of beneficiaries. In May last year the high court ruled that Cash Paymaster Services (CPS) could continue to deduct money for airtime, loans and electricity from social grant beneficiaries. Now the Supreme Court of Appeal is being asked to rule either that the regulations, which were amended two years ago, prevent the likes of Net1 subsidiaries from making deductions on accounts for grant recipients, or to amend the regulations if they are not clear enough to forbid them from making these deductions. Social grants are administered by Sassa, which uses CPS, a subsidiary of Net1 UEPS Technologies. Black Sash national advocacy manager Hoodah Abrahams-Fayker said the case is important because it deals with the most vulnerable in society, whose personal data have been breached and who suffer when deductions are made from their grants. Numerous grant recipients have complained about the deductions; some are left with only half of their grants. They have found it difficultto establish which company is making the deductions. The judgment will affect how 10-million beneficiaries use their bank accounts and how about R550-million reaches them each month. “The challenge is against the regulation. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.