The DA has lost control of another municipality after Nelson Mandela Bay mayor Athol Trollip lost a vote of no confidence on Monday. In a win for President Cyril Ramaphosa, SA will steer clear of nuclear in favour of cheaper and cleaner power sources, although coal will remain a key party of electricity generation. Deal-making doyen Brian Joffe, who started building the sprawling Bidvest empire during one of the country’s most turbulent times, has urged financial institutions and asset managers to invest in SA. Long knives are now out for Tshwane mayor Solly Msimanga, after the removal yesterday of Nelson Mandela Bay metro mayor Athol Trollip as the coalition between the EFF and DA continues to unravel. Crumbling bridges and infrastructure have forced the closure of the M2, after the Johannesburg Roads Agency moves swiftly to avert a potential deadly disaster. Athol Trollip was removed as Nelson Mandela Bay Metro mayor last night in a move that has been described by the EFF as a “warning shot” to the “arrogance and white supremacy” of the DA. The legal team of the state capture commission wants to “force” those implicated in state capture to testify before the commission and has asked judge Raymond Zondo to play hardball by placing conditions on applications to cross-examine witnesses. They meet twice monthly but seeing their children with someone else is agony.
In 2014, a court ordered the children must stay with the ‘wrong’ mothers until they are 18. Vytjie Mentor says the price was for pebble bed modular reactor plan to be dropped. A UN fact-finding mission established in March 2017 accuses Myanmar’s military, known as the Tatmadaw, of murder, rape, torture, false imprisonment, and sexual slavery. It says the abuses, which also involved other security forces, took place not only in the western state of Rakhine, home to the Rohingya, but also in the northern states of Kachin and Shan. (Quartz) The US will compensate farmers who’ve been hit by tariffs. The farm-aid package will now include $4.7-billion in direct payments to farmers. The bulk of that will go to soybean farmers, who will receive $3.6-billion, but it will also include payments for sorghum and hog farmers. (Quartz) Toyota Motor Corp. is investing about $500-million in Uber Technologies Inc. as part of an agreement by the companies to work jointly on autonomous vehicles aimed at improving safety and lowering transportation costs. (Wall Street Journal)