The start of a two-day Cabinet lekgotla on Tuesday coincided with the release of StatsSA data showing that manufacturing production contracted in the first quarter. The damage caused by protesting students in the Fees Must Fall movement has cost universities more than R786-million, equivalent to the annual state subsidy provided to a small university, Parliament heard on Tuesday. The University of Johannesburg will recover more than R14-million from two former executives, who siphoned the money from the institution through several well-calculated acts of fraud. DStv has confirmed, in a short message to subscribers, that the Afro Worldview news channel, formerly known as ANN7, would go off air on August 20. “Thuma Qedani Mahlangu and Brian Hlongwa to jail or we’ll thuma you out of office in the next elections!” This was what Treatment Action Campaign said during a march to the Gauteng legislature. It was “ludicrous and unfair” to expect of SACP leader Chris Hani’s assassin Jansucz Walus to become pro-communist before he could be released on parole, his counsel argued yesterday in the high court in Pretoria. Township businesses fuming Township tavern and shebeen owners are up in arms at government’s plan to introduce the new tobacco control Bill which they believe is “impossible to implement or enforce in a township environment” The ANC wants the big retail companies to buy 75% of their stock from local manufacturers. A chief has appealed to his furious community for calm after they torched a farm in Kranskop in KZN after the farmer dug up grave sites to plant mielies. Gauteng residents will have to wait for some time before a clear word comes through on what should happen to the failed e-tolling system in the province. Republican Party leaders had scrambled to help Troy Balderson amid mounting alarm that Democratic voters could seize the Columbus-area House seat. Republicans salvaged the race only by heavily outspending Danny O’Connor, the Democrat, while tarring him as a puppet of Nancy Pelosi, the House minority leader. (The New York Times) The EU is set on a collision course with Donald Trump after its foreign policy chief called for Europeans to increase their business dealings with Iran in defiance of bellicose statements from the US president. (The Guardian)