One hundred metres from the Tshwane University of Technology’s (TUT) gate and across the road lies a mound of dirt — sand that has been kicked across the bloody stain where Katlego Monareng was shot and killed. Reaction to last week’s death of the 26-year-old law student, who was allegedly shot by police during a student protest over student representative council elections,has drawn strong reaction from the university. But outside of TUT, his killing has drawn muted reactions from the higher education community. “No stone will be left unturned to get to the bottom of alleged election irregularities that led to the disruptions and the subsequent shooting,” said vice-chancellor Lourens van Staden. On Wednesday, students took to the streets of Pretoria, to “garner public sympathy to force the minister of police to give this issue special attention”, said Sthembiso KaShandu, a member of the South African Democratic Student Movement, the student wing of the Inkatha Freedom Party. Who was responsible for Monareng’s death is still being determined. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.