When President Cyril Ramaphosa told his fellow ANC leaders at the party lekgotla that he would take the lead in announcing the party’s decision to support expropriation of land without compensation, he received a round of applause. But the clapping of hands may have come for very different reasons among members of the competing factions in attendance. Ramaphosa’s supporters would presumably have been happier with the ANC president making such an announcement than ANC secretary general Ace Magashule, whom they have previously accused of distorting the decisions of national executive committee meetings. On the other hand, the anti-Ramaphosa group, which has in the past accused him of failing to implement radical policies taken at the party’s national conference at Nasrec last December, would have been happy that it was finally putting pressure on the ANC president to toe the line and articulate party resolutions. Since the conference, ANC leaders have sent out different messages on the issue of land, with those supporting Ramaphosa arguing that the Constitution in its current form allows for expropriation of land without compensation. For the anti-Ramaphosa grouping, the ANC president and his supporters are reneging on their mandate to implement the party’s radical resolutions — in order to appease capital. In defending Ramaphosa, his supporters have said he has a duty to attract investment into the country, to grow the economy and create much-needed jobs. Former finance minister Trevor Manuel, one of four investment envoys appointed by Ramaphosa to sell South Africa to investors, last month said that explaining the ongoing land debate has been tougher than expected. According to Business Day, Ramaphosa has given his envoys — Manuel; former Standard Bank chief executive Jacko Maree; businesswoman Phumzile Langeni; former deputy minister of finance Mcebisi Jonas; and his economic adviser, Trudi Makhaya ­— a target of $100-billion in investment over the next five years. Some political observers say Ramaphosa’s late-night announcement on land was a clear demonstration that the party was in panic mode ahead of the crucial 2019 general elections. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.