The sudden resignation of Cape Town mayor Patricia de Lille has left her fiercest critic, JP Smith, bitter, saying it was an admission of guilt. Load shedding will be reduced due to many workers returning to work, despite pending wage and bonus negotiations. UCT has instituted an inquiry into the death of renowned South African cardiologist Professor Bongani Mayosi, whose funeral was held at the weekend. SACP leader Chris Hani’s assassin, Janusz Walus, will this week again apply to the high court in Pretoria for his release on parole, subject to deportation to Poland on his release. Countering a wide range of allegations of corruption at it by a whistleblower, the Health Professions Council of South Africa yesterday said action was being taken by the organisation to stamp out graft. Brian Molefe has lashed out at Treasury-appointed investigators for what he claims are procedural irregularities in their probe into the rot at Transnet and Eskom under his watch. Mineral Resources Minister Gwede Mantashe wants to declare a further two year moratorium on mining applications for Xolobeni on the Eastern Cape’s Wild Coast, where competing interests over a potential titanium mine have resulted in violence and death. Parliament has sought a legal opinon from senior counsel about what questions can legitimately be asked of former Steinhoff CEO Markus Jooste should he be subpoenaed to appear before the finance committee. President Trump said that a June 2016 meeting in Trump Tower between campaign aides and a Kremlin-connected lawyer was designed to “get information on an opponent.” Mr. Trump claimed that the meeting was “totally legal,” though it is a key subject of the investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III. (The New York Times) At least 91 people have been killed and more than 200 severely injured in a 7.0 magnitude earthquake that rocked the Indonesian tourist islands of Lombok and Bali on Sunday evening, the secondly deadly quake to hit in a week. (The Guardian)