Arundhati Roy in South Africa: The author of Booker prize-winning novel The God of Small Things, as well as The Ministry of Utmost Happiness and a series of non-fiction books, will be in Cape Town on August 13 in conversation with author Haji Mohamed Dawjee, who wrote Sorry, Not Sorry, and feminist activist Kim Windvogel. Details: The talk starts at3.3pmat the University of Cape Town’s Smuts Hall, Residence Street, Rondebosch.
RSVP to marketing@penguinrandomhouse.co.za. There will be a Johannesburg leg of the tour on August 16 at the Wits Club, University of the Witwatersrand, 1  Jan Smuts Ave, Braamfontein. Ndoni by Musa Hlatshwayo: The artist uses dance, video and slide projections to explore the lives of women who leave home to find work in Durban, in places such as the Warwick Precinct and Thokoza Hostel. Details: Ndoni will be performed at the Playhouse Company, 231 Anton Lembede Street, Durban,on August 11 at 3pm. Tickets cost from R30 to R80. For more information visit playhousecompany.com. On Common Ground by David Goldblatt and Peter Magubane: Under the curation of photographer Paul Weinberg, the works of photographers David Goldblatt and Peter Magubane are being exhibited side by side to reflect their legacies of documenting apartheid and beyond. Goldblatt died in June. Details: The exhibition is on at the Goodman Gallery, 163 Jan Smuts Ave, Parkwood, Johannesburg, until August 18. For more information visit goodman-gallery.com. Anecdotes of Sound by Mongezi Ncaphayi: The printmaker has collaborated with David Krut Workshop to create 26 small-scale monotypes that take viewers on a visual journey with sound by jazz artists such as Don Pullen, Charles Lloyd, Jason Moran, Abdullah Ibrahim, Archie Shepp and Kandance Springs. Details: The performance is on at David Krut Projects, 142 Jan Smuts Avenue, Randburg, until August  19. Admission is free. For more information visit davidkrutprojects.com. As We Are by Colbert Mashile: By looking at the mundane of the everyday, the artist uses the personal objects we surround ourselves with to highlight that they are imbued with meaning, giving insight into human nature. Details: The exhibition is on at Circa on Jellicoe Gallery, 2 Jellicoe Road, Rosebank, Johannesburg until August 18. For more information visit www.everard-read.co.za/exhibitions.