With only a few months left until the 2019 national elections, the Democratic Alliance this week found itself beset by a new crisis —its decision to disavow broad-based black economic empowerment. The negative public reaction to policy head Gwen Ngwenya’s announcement about ditching the empowerment legislation governing companies is expected to dominate discussions at the next federal executive committee meeting. The row overshadowed the announcement of Cape Town mayor Patricia de Lille’s resignation, a move that may finally draw a line under the dispute that has dominated a year of internal disputes, policy disagreement and coalition challenges for the country’s official opposition party. On Sunday, DA leader Mmusi Maimane announced the party had amicably resolved issues with De Lille, who would be resigning as mayor at the end of October. This follows months of clashes between De Lille and the DA, including no-confidence motions from her own caucus. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.