Human Settlements Minister Nomaindia Mfeketo has become embroiled in a tussle with the board of the Community Schemes Ombud Services (CSOS) over its “investment” of R80-million with the embattled VBS Mutual Bank. Last month, Mfeketo suspended chief ombud Seeng Letele because of the payment, which was done without the required permission of the minister and the treasury, and ordered the CSOS to take urgent steps to fix the mess within 14 days. Although the department did not confirm the suspension, two CSOS insiders say the board is challenging the suspension, arguing it is its decision to make. The board is also seeking legal advice on the directive issued by Mfeketo in terms of section 28 of the CSOS Act. This section allows the minister to appoint an administrator and strip the board of its powers if it fails to take any action specified by the minister in cases when the service is in financial difficulty, is being mismanaged or is unable to perform effectively because of infighting. “It has come down to technicalities,” one source said. “Even though she [Letele] was originally seconded to CSOS by the department, her permanent employment [last month] as chief ombud was confirmed by the Cabinet. However, the minister did not formalise her appointment through a letter yet, so she can still be seen as a departmental employee.” The second source, who is part of the CSOS leadership, said: “The board is divided over whether to defend her or not. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.