Wentworth residents have told the high court in Durban that it was the police, acting on the instruction of Engen, and not them who caused the violence during a demonstration outside the petrochemical giant’s Durban refinery earlier this year. They have also accused Engen of going to court with the cynical motive of securing an interdict not to protect its property from harm but to “silence” ongoing protests by residents. Frank Alexander, a community liaison officer with the South Durban Basin Community Development Trust, made these claims in papers submitted to the court in response to an interim interdict secured by the company last month. The interim order was granted against Alexander and four other residents who had been involved in the protests over contracts, jobs and residents’ demands for a training centre and shares in the company. Engen had said in papers that protests by residents in June had been violent and were a threat to its refinery in Wentworth’s Tara Road. Alexander said Engen had provided no evidence of violence on the part of the protesters, himself or any of the other respondents. The company had failed to produce footage from its security cameras to back up its claims. He said that, on the day of the march, the police had cordoned off Tara Road to allow residents to deliver a memorandum to the refinery, where they had been scheduled to meet Engen chief executive Yusa Hassan. Residents had arrived at the gates to be told Hassan would not meet them. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.