The ANC’s proposed economic stimulus package to boost growth and possible plans by the government to pump more money into ailing parastatals comes at a time when the state has very little room to manoeuvre. This was highlighted in a report released by rating agency Moody’s, which warned that the state is likely to miss its fiscal consolidation targets set out in February’s budget, in part because of weaker than expected economic growth and a rising public sector wage bill. It also pointed out the risks posed by rising interest payments on government debt and any potential support to state-owned entities (SOEs). The rand, in an already turbulent week, fell about 3.34% to R14.73 against the dollar after the release of the report on Wednesday and other gloomy data, notably retail sales, which surprised the market with a paltry 0.7% growth year on year. The poor retail figures have raised the spectre of another technical recession. When considered alongside the most recent mining and manufacturing figures, it is likely that the economy entered a technical recession in the second quarter of 2018, FNB senior economic analyst Jason Muscat said in a note. The Mail & Guardian reported last week that the proposed stimulus package could cost about R48-billion. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.