KwaZulu-Natal church leaders have joined a high court challenge by individuals and civil society groups to force the Ingonyama Trust board to abandon its controversial programme of converting permission to occupy (PTO) certificates into residential leases. The KwaZulu-Natal Council of Churches, the Catholic Church and the Lutheran Church have backed the application, which will be brought by the Legal Resources Centre in the high court in Pietermaritzburg this month. Critics of the leases say they undermine right of tenure rather than reinforce it, and place rural people who have lived on the tribally controlled land for free for years in a position where they have to pay annually — or face eviction. Thabiso Mbhense, the lawyer for the applicants, said the application by residents of Jozini and uMnini, both of which fall under the Ingonyama Trust, which controls about three million hectares of rural KwaZulu-Natal on behalf of King Goodwill Zwelithini, would be brought in the next few weeks. “The final affidavits are drafted and we are finalising court papers and preparing to lodge the application,’’ Mbhense said. The applicants want the court to rule the practice of converting PTO certificates to leases, which the board began last year, as illegal, on the grounds that it undermines and weakens the right of tenure of rural people living on trust land. They will argue that the conversion to leases, which come with default clauses, places residents in a precarious position, because the board could repossess their properties if they fail to pay the annual lease fee. The board, chaired by former judge Jerome Ngwenya, started the conversions in 2016, arguing that it was doing so to allow government employees living on tribal land to qualify for housing subsidies. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.