In an extraordinary echo of events described in the just-released book The Lost Boys of Bird Island, co-author Mark Minnie was reportedly found dead on Monday in Port Elizabeth. It is not clear yet whether Minnie’s death is being regarded as a suicide but the book details two apparent suicides in the course of an investigation he conducted into paedophilia among highly placed politicians in the late 1980s — suicides that, in the analysis of the book, begin to look much like planned assassinations then set up to look like suicide. Minnie was the policeman who first uncovered evidence that Cabinet ministers in the apartheid National Party government were involved in the sexual abuse of boys. The boys were allegedly taken to Bird Island, off the coast near Port Elizabeth, to spend time with Cabinet ministers who, according to information in the book, were flown to the island by helicopter, including those of the military. The book, co-written by Minnie with journalist Chris Steyn, who was probing the abuse allegations at the time, details how the case was ultimately shut down by intervention from high up in the PW Botha government. Minnie left the police and has worked for the past 20 years as a teacher in Asia.
He returned to South Africa for the launch of the book, and Steyn is reported to have said they were dealing with new evidence that had emerged.  As Minnie tells the story, which he felt he was unable to let go of despite having left the police, he had followed up the case of one of the youths, who was secretly admitted to hospital and treated after being shot in the anus. This led him to the people involved, and the two suicides followed. The victims were later untraceable, and a case could not be made. The book ends with an appeal for any victims still alive to come forward, and shortly after publication one did. Netwerk 24 reported: “He told the publication that he had been kidnapped at the age of 13 in 1987 by a group of white men in Port Elizabeth.” He was “raped and forced to perform other sexual acts by former defence minister Magnus Malan and another ‘uncle’”. One of the ministers was John Wiley, minister of environmental affairs in the PW Botha government. Wiley was found dead, apparently by his own hand, in March 1987, weeks after the alleged suicide of Dave Allen, who had a guano concession on Bird Island and who was close to Wiley. Both had become aware that they were under investigation by Minnie in the case of the abused boys. But the book implicates other ministers in PW Botha’s Cabinet. Malan was probably the second-most powerful person in South Africa at the time. He was known for his militaristic response to any opposition to the apartheid regime. According to the book, on at least two occasions Malan was confronted with the Bird Island allegations; he responded differently on each occasion, either denying or deflecting the claims. A third minister alleged to have been involved is not named in the book, for legal reasons: he is still alive and could sue, say the publishers. Barend du Plessis, who was the minister of finance in the PW Botha government, told Volksblad on August 13 that the references to the “third minister” were clearly aimed at him and that he strongly denied any involvement. The story of the abused youths of Bird Island was investigated by several publications at the time, including The Weekly Mail, but, in the wake of Allen and Wiley’s deaths, definitive evidence was not forthcoming and the victims could not be traced. The Lost Boys of Bird Island is published by Tafelberg