  The Land Bank will get a major cash injection to allow it to increase funding in the form of soft loans to black farmers who have benefited from the government’s land reform programme. The funding also aims to ensure that all land in black hands, and state land that is lying idle, is “placed under production”. Last week Agriculture Minister Senzeni Zokwana told the Mail & Guardian the government is also planning a major shake-up in the fishing industry, which he described as the “most untransformed”, to improve the share of black people in the sector. This will include major changes when quotas are allocated in 2020. A state fishing company will be created to boost the participation of people living at the coast in the industry. Zokwana said his department’s plan and its role in stimulating the economy had been discussed at the Cabinet’s recent lekgotla. Greater co-ordination between national and provincial agriculture departments, and between agriculture and other national ministries, was needed to ensure projects were implemented and that assets were used properly, he said. He added that the policy of expropriation without compensation should not cause panic among farmers because an amendment to section 25 of the Constitution would provide “clarity” about which land could be expropriated and under what conditions. Zokwana said his department aimed to increase the number of agriculture jobs from 847000 to a million by stimulating farming, fishing and forestry. Greater focus would be placed on processing and marketing agricultural products, which would create new jobs, rather than exporting raw produce for processing abroad. The Land Bank, he said, needed “an injection of funding” to allow it to finance and promote new farming and agribusiness projects and assist in improving irrigation.It is also helping to fund drought- and heat-resistant seed cultivars, to help prevent the repeat of job losses such as those experienced in the drought of 2016–2017. Zokwana did not want to expand on how much was needed or where it would come from beyond saying the “money would be found”. A shake-up of the fishing industry and the issuing of new licences in the coastal provinces should create another 300 permanent jobs. “The president made it clear that the aim is to create certainty around section 25,” he said.“We will be cautious …we don’t want to kill the mainstay of the economy.” Zokwana said some farmers were interested in giving half of their farms to farmworkers and in keeping their farms productive. According to StatsSA, 109 000 agriculture jobs were lost last year, mainly because of the drought. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.