South African Social Services Agency (Sassa) officials fear that Social Development Minister Susan Shabangu is following in the footsteps of her predecessor, Bathabile Dlamini, by handpicking people to act as her proxies at the agency. The officials have pointed out Shabangu’s appointment last month of a controversial former bureaucrat, Benedicta Monama, as her special adviser and, days later, Monama was announced as Sassa’s acting chief operating officer (COO). Shabangu’s spokesperson, Thuli Nhlapo, said Monama’s appointment did not flout processes. “In response to Sassa acting CEO’s [chief executive officer Abraham Mahlangu] request for a senior official to assist him in overseeing certain duties that were not  administrative in nature and did not include the signing of financial documents, the minister seconded Ms Monama to Sassa for a short period that ended on 31 July. The above was in line with the Public Service Act, 1994 (as amended),” she said. Monama denied acting as the COO. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.