Next week the portfolio committee on police will consider Police Minister Bheki Cele’s request for a six-month amnesty so that unlicensed firearms can be surrendered to the police. In June, the Constitutional Court ruled that every owner whose licence had expired — and had not been renewed ­— would have to surrender their firearms to the police immediately or face arrest. Cele wants the portfolio committee to approve his request for the National Assembly to authorise a six-month amnesty from September 1 to February 28 next year. For now, the illegal firearms are to be handed in and destroyed en masse. But critics argue that the police are the worst culprits when it comes to securing firearms — legal or illegal. The minister announced in June that he would approach the committee to consider the amnesty, but a fortnight ago lobby group Gun Owners of South Africa (Gosa) won an urgent interim interdict in the high court on the grounds that the police had not presented a plan to collect and store the weapons. Gosa’s Paul Oxley said that police don’t have the capacity to collect, transport and store more than 437 000 firearms and about 60-million rounds of ammunition. “That’s why we went to court; to highlight this as a national security crisis,” said Oxley. “This is container loads of ammunition. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.