The initial leg of the Nugent commission’s public hearings focused on how the South African Revenue Service (Sars) was built up and, after the arrival of now suspended commissioner Tom Moyane, then broken down. The second leg, which kicked off this week, revealed how tax fraudsters took advantage of the now weakened Sars. Sars officials from enforcement units that had focused on high-value and high-risk individuals told the commission how they could no longer investigate tax compliance in the illicit sector after Moyane introduced a new operating model in 2015, reportedly based on the advice of consulting firm Bain & Company. The officials’ testimonies were corroborated by at least five other officials, some of whom chose not to appear before the commission and submitted affidavits instead, one of the evidence leaders, Carol Steinberg, said before the start of Tuesday’s hearings. “At this stage, we are reasonably comfortable that it is not an individual opinion or grudge,” she said, adding that there was still room to test the evidence. The kind of cases that would have be investigated by these units involved key players in organised crime, smuggling, poaching and the tobacco and liquor fields, as well as high-net-worth individuals with offshore entities and special vehicles to hide their income streams. Keith Hendrikse, a former senior manager for the national projects office in the Western Cape, highlighted how the case of “one of the biggest [crime bosses] in South Africa”, who owed Sars about R400-million, was derailed with the help of some Sars officials. He said that, when he was at the Cape Town office after his unit was broken up, he had bumped into an Sars auditor from the newly formed internal investigations unit who had come to collect the audit files for this notorious taxpayer. “I asked whose instruction this was and he said he was not sure but as far as he knows he has been told it’s at the instruction of the commissioner.” Hendrikse said the files, which filled a room, were being used for evidence in high court litigation and the auditor could not walk away with them. He later found out that the auditor had been instructed to write to the taxpayer saying that his audit was being reviewed. The taxpayer produced the email in the court, saying Sars could not proceed with litigation because of the audit review being done. “That was to my mind a deliberate attempt to derail that process. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.