At least six infants have died since July at an East Rand hospital as a result of a suspected antibiotic-resistant bacteria in a neonatal ward. The fate of the North West ANC leadership will, be decided by top party leaders next week. “Even if I can faint here, these children will rush me to the nearest clinic; my health is the least of my problems because I am here to ask President Ramaphosa to pardon my son and other #FeesMustFall student activists” — Bonginkosi Khanyile’s mother. National treasury can’t keep track of the R800-billion the state spends on goods and services annually, and can’t tell if all the money goes where it is supposed to. The South African Revenue Service has breached regulations by inflating compliance figures for corporate and personal income tax, the auditor general found in his latest report. In the first action against serving employees since it became the subject of one of the biggest corporate scandals in SA’s history, Steinhoff International Holdings on Tuesday suspended its former CFO and another former executive. “We’ve been to war,” was how Pieter Engelbrecht, the CEO of Africa’s largest food retailer, described trading conditions behind the first drop in earnings since 1998. South Africans cannot be expected to pay R500 000 in taxes towards braai areas at ministerial homes. Scopa said this after reports that the department of public works spent half a million on these facilities at three ministerial houses in Cape Town. The SABC board yesterday told Parliament its bank account was so empty that workers and freelancers should feel lucky to be paid at all. The NPA is confident the Vrede dairy criminal case will not be struck off the roll and they will complete their investigations within three months. Wearing t-shirts with the slogan #LoveIsLove, gay and lesbian members of the Dutch Reformed Church yesterday gathered at the high court in Pretoria seeking to set aside the church’s 2016 decision not to recognise same-sex unions. Despite controversy surrounding the introduction of the comprehensive sexuality education (CSE) curriculum in schools, experts agree its success depends on whether it is relevant to the South African context. Harrowing details were laid bare of lurid and ongoing sexual assault that some Parktown Boys’ High School learners endured at the hands of a sex pest and their former water polo assistant coach, Collan Rez, 22. The EFF is turning up the heat on the Hawks’ probe of two former UJ executives accused of defrauding the institution of about R30-million.