The Democratic Alliance’s Western Cape leader, Bonginkosi Madikizela, has hit back at his critics in the DA, who believe he is unfit to be a premier candidate because of governance crises in municipalities. DA insiders said a grouping aligned to Premier Helen Zille is pushing for economic opportunities MEC Alan Winde to become the next premier. Though Winde and Madikizela are known to be part of the grouping linked to Zille, they are now opponents for the position, splitting opinion in the camp about who Zille’s successor should be. Those pushing for Winde claim Madikizela has been unable to keep a firm grip as provincial leader and is therefore unfit to lead the Western Cape government. But those pushing for Madikizela believe it would be an insult to him if someone else was selected as premier candidate while he is provincial leader. Speaking to the Mail &Guardian this week, Madikizela dismissed criticism that he had failed as provincial leader. “Those are isolated cases. I think people forget that in the Western Cape we are in government in 29 municipalities. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.