The furore over a fundraising event for gender-based violence with self-confessed women-beater Mduduzi Manana as a keynote speaker has not subsided, despite the former ANC MP distancing himself from it. Cope urges MPs to pass new law for assisted dying Cope is pushing for Parliament to pass a law that allows terminally ill patients to have the choice for assisted dying and die with dignity. Respected Nsfas board chairperson Sizwe Nxasana has failed to turn the fortunes of the institution around, the South African Union of Students said yesterday. Manyi wins lawsuit case against activist Businessman Mzwanele Manyi has won a defamation lawsuit against #FeesMustFall activist Mcebo Dlamini, who had called him a “lame, lazy, horny, stinky old donkey.” At the weekend, DA leaders clashed over its policy on broad based BEE. The party’s ideological direction is being challenged as it seeks to refine its policy before the 2019 elections. Barclays divorce helps Absa win back lost market share Absa is beginning to claw back market share lost to its rivals during the Barclays era. Daily Sun Pastor Paseka “Mboro” Motsoeneng was over the moon after the high court removed Absa’s case to have his assets repossessed from the court roll. The ANC wants prices of data to fall by October. It is also pushing for SABC channels, including Parliament TV, to be moved from pay TV platform DStv and be free to air. The leadership of the South African Municipal Workers Union has been accused of illegally extending its stay at the helm of the biggest municipal labour union in the country. The SA National Taxi Council (Santaco) said yesterday it had been summoned to appear before Parliament’s portfolio committee on police next week to engage in talks about why investigations tied with the taxi industry have been inconclusive. The Gauteng department of health could be facing a raft of malpractice cases after it emerged that as many as 20 000 patients may have suffered due to negligence in the past two years. For decades, Mr. Gates was right-hand man to Mr. Manafort, the former Trump campaign chairman who is accused of tax and bank fraud. He began testifying in federal court on Monday. Asked by prosecutors whether he was involved in any criminal activity with Mr. Manafort, Mr. Gates responded, “Yes.” (The New York Times) The US has reimposed blanket sanctions on Iran, hitting the country’s access to dollars, gold and precious metals. (The Guardian)