Gauteng provincial executive committee (PEC) members Brian Hlongwa and Qedani Mahlangu have been called on to “introspect” and “make the right decision” following the public furore over their election to the committee. The province’s newly elected provincial secretary, Jacob Khawe, has also asked the ANC’s integrity committee to have the two leaders appear before it. Hlongwa is under investigation for alleged corruption during his tenure as health MEC between 2006 and 2009, and Mahlangu has been widely blamed for the deaths of 144 Life Esidimeni psychiatric patients. “From the perspective of revolutionary morality, I leave [it] to both of them to look at the matter, look at themselves and look at the ANC, and then take the right decision which will seek to advance the interests of the party,” Khawe said. “Revolutionary morality … it’s where it is not necessarily just about justice and internal processes, it’s about having individual consciousness. Are you listening to what people are saying? Are you listening to the cries of the people?” the former ANC Youth League leader said. Hlongwa and Mahlangu were elected at the party’s Gauteng conference last month. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.