Public protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane has roasted Police Minister Bheki Cele for failing to provide police protection to two whistle blowers in “grave danger” of assassination. A determination was made by the police and the State Security Agency that Thabiso Zulu and Les Stuta required protection. Mkhwebane wants President Cyril Ramaphosa to “reprimand” Cele for his “gross negligence” and “lapse in judgment”. She has also instructed national police commissioner Khehla Sitole to provide the two, who were witnesses in her investigation into alleged corruption totalling R37-million in the renovation of the Umzimkhulu Memorial Hall, with protection. But Cele has decided to take Mkhwebane’s report on review and will not provide the two with protection until the review process is concluded. The report — titled Undue Delay, Improper Conduct:Gross negligence and maladministration by the minister of police and the South African Police Service in failing to provide whistleblowers with security at state expense after it was recommended that they needed protection — was sent to Cele and Sitole last week. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.