The board of directors of the embattled Public Investment Corporation’s (PIC) has sought legal advice about suspending its chief executive officer, Dan Matjila, and its chief financial officer, Matshepo More, before the start of an independent forensic investigation. This was revealed by board chairperson and Deputy Finance Minister Mondli Gungubele this week. Current and former staff members, who claim there have been irregularities and impropriety at the state-owned entity, wrote to Gungubele last week to request that the two be suspended. The letter followed Finance Minister Nhlanhla Nene’s recent announcement that the board should conduct an independent forensic investigation into the allegations levelled against the two executives, and that a commission of inquiry should be established into the whole of the PIC. Gungubele said the allegations had been public since last year so “the question can be asked: What difference does it make if you suspend them now? However, you cannot discount the possibility of their presence interfering with the investigation.” The board had decided it would seek a legal opinion on what would be “a fair process for both the subjects of the investigation and the institution”, Gungubele said. He said the board wanted the investigation to start next week. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.