The search is on for a new National Director of Public Prosecutions, after the Constitutional Court yesterday delivered yet another damning judgment against former president Jacob Zuma. A grade 12 learner allegedly died by suicide a few hours after he was arrested and charged with the theft of a cellphone at his school. Advocacy groups have warned of a second Marikana as the nation prepares to commemorate the sixth anniversary of the work post-independence killing of protesters. President Cyril Ramaphosa will appoint an acting head of the National Prosecuting Authority on Tuesday after the Constitutional Court ruled that Shaun Abraham’s appointment by former president Jacob Zuma was “constitutionally invalid”, the Presidency has confirmed. SA’s embattled consumers and companies look set to be spared another interest rate hike in the wake of the rand’s slice to a two-year low against the dollar. The Constitutional Court yesterday told Shaun Abrahams to vacate his job as NPA boss — a move that led to calls for President Cyril Ramaphosa to ‘within days’ appoint ‘a legal eagle with integrity’. The owner of three properties in the Zwartkop area on Gauteng’s West Rand, which is allegedly a target area for government’s test run for expropriation without compensation, says he will destroy rather than let them be taken. A car guard who witnessed a vicious attack on his colleague has describer how the deceased endured a beating from an angry motorist who jumped on both his feet, thudding into the man’s face. The country’s most watched TV show, Uzalo, faces a bleak future, allegedly due to the SABC’s financial situation. Firms are struggling to recruit staff after a steep fall in the number of people coming to Britain from the European Union, a report has said. Some 40% of employers had found it harder to fill vacancies in the past 12 months, the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD) found. However, it also said a tighter labour market was boosting wages for some. (BBC) A Japanese Buddhist temple has conducted a memorial for 35 sets of remains belonging to Korean people brought to Japan to work for its factories and military during World War II before they are sent home this week, a South Korean civic group said Monday. Representatives of the civic group, organised in 2008 for the return of the remains of Korean forced labour victims, took part in the ritual at Kokuhei Temple in western Tokyo on Sunday, along with South Korean activists, officials of the General Association of Korean Residents in Japan, known as Chongryon, and the temple’s Japanese followers.
(Yonhap news) President Donald Trump on Monday signed a $716-billion defensc policy bill named for John McCain but included no mention in his remarks of the Republican senator, who is battling brain cancer at home in Arizona. Trump and McCain are engaged in a long-running feud that dates to Trump’s 2016 presidential run. (Time)