Democratic Alliance (DA) leader Mmusi Maimane says his party will not give in to the Economic Freedom Fighters’ (EFF) demands for the DA to field a new candidate to replace Solly Msimanga as Tshwane mayor. Maimane further accused the EFF and the ANC of being in the process of forming a “coalition of corruption” after the two parties brought motions of no confidence against Msimanga. The Tshwane mayor will know on Thursday whether he will remain at the city’s helm or be removed by parties that are accusing him of allowing corruption to take place in the municipality under his watch. On Wednesday, Maimane held a briefing following a special meeting of the DA’s federal executive committee to assert the DA’s support for him and confirm that the party will not offer an alternative mayoral candidate to appease the EFF. “The EFF has already said give us another candidate. In what universe should we let the EFF dictate to us that we must remove somebody who has done their job? Maimane said. “Come tomorrow’s council meeting we will not be fielding another candidate.
The caucus in Tshwane is resolute,” he added. Last week, the EFF announced its intention to bring a motion of no confidence against Msimanga accusing him of failing to consult coalition partners on major administrative decisions and giving in to the demands of the “white caucus of the DA”. Shortly after the EFF’s announcement the ANC also made public its plans to also bring a motion against the mayor, accusing him of failing to address “rampant corruption” such as the alleged irregular awarding of a R12-billion tender to engineering consultancy GladAfrica. Depending on which motion the council hears on Thursday, the EFF and ANC have agreed to vote together to oust Msimanga. Maimane said he was not surprised by the partnership between the two parties, which also resulted in the removal of Nelson Mandela Bay mayor Athol Trollip following a no confidence motion on Monday. “This attack is a new formation and partnership that has been created between the EFF and the ANC. “We are of the complete view that the assault isn’t just against what takes place in government it is an assault against the will of the people,” Maimane said. “I believe should the EFF make a decision to continue their coalition with ANC they must formally do so and show the people of South Africa that for them this is a homecoming revolution and a chance for them to work with the ANC.”