Durban mayor and eThekwini ANC chairperson Zandile Gumede appears to have fallen out of favour with her backers in the city and will face a serious challenge to her leadership when the party’s regional conference sits next year. Gumede, who championed Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma’s unsuccessful bid for the ANC presidency in December, has alienated some of her own supporters because of her backing of the failed re-election of provincial secretary Super Zuma last month. Gumede pushed the “status quo” slate — backed by former president Jacob Zuma — which was defeated by a “unity” leadership that backed Mdumiseni Ntuli for the post. Now Gumede faces a backlash in her own region, the largest and most influential in the ANC, with eThekwini secretary Bheki Ntuli being mooted as a candidate for both her disgruntled supporters and followers of former chairperson James Nxumalo. Gumede defeated Nxumalo, who backed Cyril Ramaphosa, at the 2015 regional conference, which was postponed several times and twice had its result set aside by the national leadership over irregularities. Although the conference is due to be held in December, it is likely to be postponed until after the national elections because the ANC national executive committee had ruled that all conferences after the end of August should be deferred so as not to affect the party’s campaign. An ANC source in eThekwini, who asked to remain anonymous, said that a realignment was taking place between some of Gumede’s supporters and backers of Nxumalo because of her insistence on backing the “status quo” slate. “Comrades are tired of the mess in the region and are looking at who to support as a new chairperson,” the source said. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.