The re-elected KwaZulu-Natal leaders of the South African Communist Party want the SACP to examine the effect that serving in the Cabinet has on the ability of its leaders to serve working-class interests. They believe this should be part of the discussion about how the SACP perceives its role in a reconfigured alliance with the governing ANC and is necessary to prevent party office from being used as a conveyor belt to government office. Speaking to the Mail & Guardian after the SACP provincial congress in Pongola this week, provincial secretary Themba Mthembu said “introspection” was needed because “there is a threat of opportunism trying to nest itself in the party, where the working-class struggle is less important than trying to position ourselves, even for me, to get an attractive deployment.” Mthembu, who has held the post since 2002 and who was deployed as KwaZulu-Natal agriculture MEC by the ANC, said communist parties had been killed by their participation in governments. “We need to ask how deployment in the executive of government affects our leadership of the working-class formations … if we want to be honest.” Mthembu said the SACP was “not happy” about its national leadership having been “wiped out” from the ANC’s national executive committee at its December conference. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.