Controversial former Transnet and Eskom chief financial officer Anoj Singh’s cash purchase of a R6-million property in Durban’s posh Umhlanga Rocks suburb is part of a series of suspicious transactions that the treasury has referred to the elite crime-fighting unit, the Hawks, for investigation. The purchase happened in the same month as the mysterious movement by Singh of R16-million, according to a draft forensic report commissioned by the treasury. The suspicious transactions were uncovered during an investigation conducted by Fundudzi Forensic Services on behalf of the treasury into dubious multibillion-rand contracts between Eskom and Gupta-owned and associated companies. The report has yet to be finalised and has been given to the people mentioned in it for their comment. During July 2016, Singh transferred R16-million from his personal account, which had a balance of R19-milion, into two other “investment accounts” of his own. The money was then moved back into his personal account and then transferred again. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.