Newly sworn-in Zimbabwean President Emmerson Mnangagwa has promised to unite the deeply divided nation while prioritising the revival of the country’s economy. The Gauteng ANC has announced its plan to push for fresh elections in the metros where it was dislodged by DA-led coalitions. The country’s largest investment managers have demanded an investigation into the Resilient group companies after allegations of share-price manipulation, which cost investors more than R120-billion. Pressure is mounting on parliament’s trade and industry committee from all sides to either substantially change or expedite the adoption of a bill providing debt relief to the heavily overburdened. Former president Jacob Zuma says EFF leader is trying to stop state legal funding because of personal issues. The former secretary of a leading public sector union appeared in court to face charges of sexual assault and harassment after he allegedly made inappropriate advances on a female subordinate. With adequate government financial aid, black farmers will be able to show they are capable of running a productive operation, says a mango farmer. The Springboks’ upcoming away fixtures in Brisbane and Wellington now loom as massive challenges after their disappointing 32-19 Rugby Championship defeat to Argentina this week. The new measures, detailed in a notice posted at the Federal Register, will terminate foreign assistance and some arms sales and financing to Russia, as well as deny the country credit and prohibit the export of security-sensitive goods and technology. Russia’s Foreign Ministry said the sanctions will only create more tension between the two countries, the RIA news agency reported on Friday. (Reuters) US senator John McCain—a celebrated war hero and former GOP presidential candidate—has died of brain cancer, at age 81.
He was diagnosed just over a year ago, and has struggled with related health problems ever since. McCain was a politician widely respected by both sides of the congressional aisle, known for his “maverick” style and often going against the Republican Party grain. (Quartz) Elon Musk has changed his mind. The Tesla CEO tweeted to the world on Aug. 7 that he was preparing to take his electric vehicle company private, sending investors and regulators scrambling.  But in a blog post posted late Friday night, Musk said he’d thought the better of it. (Quartz) Pope Francis has refused to respond to claims by a former Vatican diplomat, who has called for him to resign. Archbishop Carlo Maria Vigano also accused him of covering up allegations of sexual abuse by a US cardinal. The Pope was asked about the accusations by reporters on his flight back to Rome after this weekend’s Papal visit to Ireland. He said he would not say a single word in response to the 11-page letter from Archbishop Vigano. (BBC)