Whistleblower Thabiso Zulu is preparing to go to court to force the police to provide him with bodyguards after the State Security Agency (SSA) found that he needed “urgently” to be protected. Zulu gave evidence at the Moerane commission of inquiry into the political killings in KwaZulu-Natal, about corruption in the Umzimkhulu local municipality and the murder of former ANC Youth League deputy secretary general Sindiso Magaqa. He also wants answers from KwaZulu-Natal Premier Willies Mchunu on why he has failed to meet his public commitment to ensure the safety of witnesses. Last year, Zulu went public about corruption in the municipality after the murder of Magaqa — his friend and a municipal councillor. He said the commission appointed by Mchunu is a response to the surge in political killings in KwaZulu-Natal since 1995, and that police crime intelligence and senior politicians were complicit in the violence. The commission’s report is currently before the provincial legislature and will be made public 21 days after it is sent back to the premier. Zulu has since asked for state protection for himself and Umzimkhulu ANC member and whistleblower Les Stuta. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.