The National Prosecuting Authority and Justice Minister Michael Masutha will go to court next month to defend the state’s decision to charge EFF leader Julius Malema for inciting land grabs — under apartheid-era laws. Over the next two weeks, all eyes will be on Zimbabwe’s Constitutional Court, the highest court in the land, led by Chief Justice Luke Malaba, which is to decide on disputed presidential election results. Some traditional leaders in KwaZulu-Natal are revolting against King Goodwill Zwelithini’s Ingonyama Trust, saying they want full rights and control of the money being generated by their land. Joburg Mayor Herman Mashaba is preparing to take on the Gupta family at the Equality Court in a fresh racism allegation application he plans to lodge against the once powerful family. The government will need R43-billion to fund, among other things, the stimulus package announced by President Cyril Ramaphosa two weeks ago, aimed at stimulating an economy teetering on the brink of recession. The National Union of Metalworkers of SA is planning to list 360 Financial Services Group, a subsidiary of its investment firm and owner of Doves funeral business, on the JSE in the next two years. Departments deny fish mortality and raw sewage link As the water and sanitation crisis on the Vaal river and its catchment escalates, two government departments have issued a joint statement denying a positive link between mass fish mortality and raw sewage flowing into the river. The plane which crashed at Wonderboom Airport in July, in an accident that claimed two lives and injured at least 20 people, had a crew without the necessary qualifications to fly it, a report has revealed. After weeks of hype, white supremacists managed to muster just a couple of dozen supporters on Sunday in the nation’s capital for the first anniversary of their deadly rally in Charlottesville, Va., finding themselves greatly outnumbered by counterprotesters, police officers and representatives of the news media. But even with the low turnout, almost no one walked away with the sense that the nation’s divisions were any closer to healing. (The New York Times) A NASA spacecraft zoomed toward the sun Sunday on an unprecedented quest to get closer to our star than anything ever sent before.As soon as this fall, the Parker Solar Probe will fly straight through the wispy edges of the sun’s corona, or outer atmosphere, that was visible during last August’s total solar eclipse.
It eventually will get within 3.8 million miles of the surface in the years ahead, staying comfortably cool despite the extreme heat and radiation, and allowing scientists to vicariously explore the sun in a way never before possible.No wonder scientists consider it the coolest, hottest mission under the sun, and what better day to launch to the sun than Sunday as NASA noted. (The Chicago Tribune) Nazi symbols can now appear in video games in Germany, ending a long-running and frequently ridiculed censorship. Germany bans symbols belonging to unconstitutional groups, which has caused problems in games where the Nazis are a frequent adversary. In games like the Wolfenstein series, German editions would change Hitler’s name, remove his moustache, and replace swastikas with another shape. The change means Nazi symbols used in an artistic way will be allowed. (BBC)