A tribute to Avicii: Some of South Africa’s DJs will come together to celebrate the life of and pay tribute to the Swedish music producer and DJ Avicii, who committed suicide earlier this year. The line-up include Rocca & Martini, Abby Nurock and Austin Cassim.
Details: The event will take place at the Goodluck Bar, 14 Alexander Street, Ferreirasdorp, Johannesburg, on August 4. Tickets are R100 from Computicket and R150 at the door. For more information email info@goodluckbar.co.za Pula: In this production, a group of women seek healing from a tree believed to hold restorative water when it rains. The problem is they are seeking their healing while their village is facing a drought. Details: Pula will be on at the PopArt Centre, 286 Fox Street, Jo’burg, until August 5. Tickets range from R100 to R120 and are available online. For more information visit popartcentre.co.za Woodstock Winter Beer Festival: Just before the cold season ends, the festival brings 17 local breweries with their brews made especially for winter. Food spots such as Didi’s Mexican, Mon Ami, Tacos Locos and Love Pizza will have stalls at the fest. The beneficiary this year is Neighbourhood Old Age Homes (Noah) based in Woodstock. Details: The festival will be at the Castle of Good Hope, corner of Darling and Buitenkant streets, Cape Town, on August 4 from 8am to 5pm. Tickets go for R80 to R100 from quicket.co.za or at the door. When Dust Settles by Igshaan Adams: The winner of this year’s Standard Bank young artist award for visual art, Igshaan Adams, will present his new body of work at the Standard Bank Gallery. When Dust Settles draws from representations of Islam as well as coloured demographics in South Africa. The artist brings together sculpture, textiles, furniture and performance. Details: The exhibition is taking place at the Standard Bank Art Gallery, Frederick Street, Marshalltown, Johannesburg, until September 15. Admission is free. Untapped Craft Brew Festival: The creators behind the Clarens Craft Beer Festival and South Africa on Tap are collaborating to present the public with a new type of festival, which will bring breweries from across South Africa together to create new flavours for beer lovers to enjoy, fresh from the tap. In the first two hours of the festival the “great beer exchange” will run, and beers will be priced according to demand, akin to a stock exchange. Details: The festival will take place at Jonsson Kings Park Stadium on Jacko Jackson Drive, Stamford Hill, Durban, on August 4. Tickets cost R140 and are available from ticketrush.co.za. For more information visit untappedfest.co.za