The Jozi Book Fair: Now in its 10th year, the Jozi Book Fair’s theme for 2018 is “Literature and Working People”. An extensive talks programme will feature writers such as Mongane Wally Serote, Bheki Peterson, Swedish poet Emil Boss, former South African statistician general Pali Lehohla, James Matthews and Diana Ferrus.
Details: August 30 to September 2, Mary Fitzgerald Square, Newtown, Jo’burg. For queries call 0843773003 StrEATFood & Comedy Festival: Enjoy an afternoon of laughter from Goliath & Goliath, live music and gourmet street food. Details: 25 at Vaal Bonne Country Estate, 1 Arden Road, Jo’burg.Tickets are R60 to R120 and can be purchased online fromconnect.nutickets.co.za. Bring a cooler box but it’ll cost R200. For more information visit connectentertainment.co.za Woke Arts Gathering: Woke Arts encourages emerging poets, visual artists, musicians and photographers. This month the focus is on women’s voices in society. Details: August 26 at Railways Cafe, 2 Hack Road, Irene, Pretoria.Tickets are R60 to R100. For more information visit facebook.com/wokearts/ Imbawula: The Money Series: Imbawula was started in 2014 to explore our shared humanity through real-life stories. For this instalment of Imbawula, in association with Nedbank, four storytellers will tell stories on the subject of money. Details: August 29 at Untitled, 7 Reserve Street, Braamfontein, Jo’burg. Doors open at 6pm for 6.30pm. Tickets are R100 at the door. Email info@randomwindow.co.za to RSVP. Trans: Curated by Brazillian Daniella Géo, Trans is a collection of work by 11 artists who explore transition with the aim to transcend, transgress and transform the norm. Details: University of Johannesburg Art Gallery, corner of Kingsway Avenue and University Road, Auckland Park, until September 19. For more information visit uj.ac.za Done to Death: Curated by Kobie Nieuwoudt, this group exhibition, hosted by Alliance Française du Cap, explores the idea of originality, repetition and reinvention in the art world. Details: August 30 at Alliance Française du Cap, 155 Loop Street, Cape Town. For more information visit alliance.org.za/capetown