Energy Minister Jeff Radebe has scuppered state energy company PetroSA from signing up for an ambitious and risky R22-billion commitment to Nigerian oilfields owned by controversial Jacob Zuma Foundation benefactor Kase Lawal. In June, Radebe rejected the company’s budget and five-year corporate plan, which contained ambitious plans to increase the refining of Nigeria Oyo crude oil to produce petrol and diesel, saying it was not detailed enough and used incorrect assumptions. The commitment to procure 23-million barrels of the oil, at a cost of R22-billion, over the next five years underpinned the strategy that would take PetroSA further away from its previous investment in gas-to-liquid technology. Radebe’s move, made in a letter that exposes rifts between him and the Central Energy Fund (CEF) Group, has left executives and the board at PetroSA scrambling for an alternative corporate plan five months into the new financial year. PetroSA is overseen by a board that — alongside the state’s other energy assets, including the Strategic Fuel Fund — reports to the CEF. The CEF is wholly owned by the state through its shareholder, the department of energy. A senior CEF insider said the rejected corporate plan and budget for 2018–2019 was the latest signal in Radebe’s intention to scrap the fund’s leadership, pointing as well to a recent advertisement for nominations and applications for a new board of directors for the CEF and all its subsidiaries. Lawal is a headline-grabber whose deals include a Public Investment Corporation (PIC) investment in the dual listed (JSE and Wall Street) Erin Energy, which earlier this year filed for bankruptcy after Nigerian authorities stopped the company from exporting oil because of a dispute over its licence to sell oil. The move by the Nigerians meant the PIC’s 2013 investment — part of which was used by Erin founder Lawal to purchase the “economic rights” to oil mining licences from companies owned by him and his family — could be wiped out.  Investigative journalism unit amaBhungane earlier this year described the PIC’s investment in Erin, which at the time was on the verge of bankruptcy, as “dodgy”. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.