Union federation Cosatu’s president S’dumo Dlamini’s time is up as leader of the federation and his own union is lobbying for him to be replaced by his deputy, Zingiswa Losi. Nominations for Cosatu leadership open on Monday and it will become clearer how much support Losi has among the federation’s 17 affiliates, which together represent about 1.7-million workers. The leadership of the National Education, Health and Allied Workers’ Union (Nehawu) called in Dlamini in July to ask him not to contest the position of Cosatu president at the federation’s elective congress next month, a senior official in the federation said anonymously this week. “Since the removal of [former president] JZ [Jacob Zuma] there was trouble between him and affiliates,” the official said. “The mood was not right at the last central committee and, to be honest, ever since he went to his [Zuma’s 70th birthday] party, the relationship was never right.” But Dlamini said: “I have never addressed the media about that matter of whether I’m available or not because I respect the members who elected me at the congress.” Dlamini and Losi appear to be the front runners for the position of president, as other candidates have not yet started lobbying for positions, senior Cosatu insiders said this week. Nehawu general secretary Zola Saphetha said Losi’s lack of support was not because of her gender but because of her capacity to lead. “We don’t look at sexual orientation of the leader;we are looking at the capacity of the leadership. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.