CAPE TOWN The Institute for Creative Arts Live Art Festival: The Mother City will be transformed into an artistic canvas for the next two weeks as more than 50 contemporary artist from here, the continent and the world converge to perform and present their work. Artists include Nelisiwe Xaba, FAKA, Athi-Patra Ruga, Sethembile Msezane, Uriel Orlow, Mamela Nyamza, Sue Williamson, Stacy Hardy, Neo Muyanga, Donna Kukama.
Details: From September 1-16. Venues include the Iziko South African National Gallery, the Maitland Institute, the Company’s Garden, the Castle of Good Hope, the University of Cape Town and the train station.For more information visit ica.uct.ac.za. Street Food Festival ZA: The festival takes place in Johannesburg and Cape Town. Enjoy a variety of foods,talks, a movie, music, a market and a food walk. Details: From September 1-9. The festival will take place at various locations including Cape Town’s Side Street Studios, 48 Albert Road, Woodstock; the V&A Waterfront; and the Labia.In Johannesburg go to the Maboneng area, 276 Fox and Kruger streets, Jeppestown. For more information visit streetfoodfestival.co.za. Bad Gallerist: Ed Young’s new works can be viewed in his solo exhibition. Details: From August 18 to September 22 at Smac Gallery, The Palms, 145 Sir Lowry Road, Woodstock.The opening is on August 30, from 6pm. Visit smacgallery.com. JOHANNESBURG Jazz in the Cradle: Jazz lovers can have a Sunday of great food, drink and music surrounded by green grass and quiet streams. Musicians include Zoë Modiga, Danno Petersen, Ayanda Sikade, Nduduzo Makhathini, Herbie Tsoaeli and DJ Kenzhero. Details: September 2. Nirox Sculpture Park at the Cradle of Humankind, 24 Kromdraai Road, Kromdraai. Gates open at 10am. Tickets for adults cost R340 and R170 for children under 12. For more information or to buy tickets visit jazzinthecradle.com. Shonibare conversations and exhibition: Showing at this year’s FNB Joburg Art Fair is Nigerian British artist Yinka Shonibare’s exhibition, Ruins Decorated.His works include painting, sculpture, film and photography and explores colonialism and post-colonialism in the context of globalisation. Shonibare will also be in conversation with William Kentridge and Hlonipha Mokoena. Details: The exhibition is on at the Goodman Gallery, 163 Jan Smuts Avenue, Parkwood, Johannesburg, until October 6. His conversation with Kentridge is on September 4 at 7pm at the Centre for the Less Good Idea, Maboneng, 261-279 Fox Street, Johannesburg. He talks to Mokoena on September 8 at 11:30 am at the Goodman Gallery. Visit goodman-gallery.com.