The Cape Town mayor’s supporters and her critics feel disappointed by her resignation deal Finance Minister Nhlanhla Nene told the Cabinet lekgotla that the government will need about R48-billion to support the implementation of the stimulus packages aimed at boosting economic growth to create more jobs. The move is in line with the bid to merge departments to drastically cut the state’s wage bill Opponents to amnesty for people with unlicensed weapons say SAPS can’t even secure their own firearms Human Settlements Minister Nomaindia Mfeketo has become embroiled in a tussle with the board of the Community Schemes Ombud Services (CSOS) over its “investment” of R80-million with the embattled VBS Mutual Bank. Has the university, rocked by protests in 2016, done enough to address gender-based violence? Tsebe was among the 64 families who had steadfastly refused to take up Anglo American’s offer of a once-off R20 000 cash payment in exchange for moving to Rooibokpan. This, an interview of radio personality Xolani Gwala by Carlos Amato, is the first of a series of profiles that the Mail & Guardian will carry every week ‘It was at that moment I decided everybody has the right to play sport, and to dedicate much of my life to developing the game to the benefit of all South Africans.’ Staff say Benedicta Monama knows little about the agency and highlight her controversial past Followers are suing the Dutch Reformed Church over its retrograde action on same-sex unions Government believes independent power producers need to be limited and controlled Songbirds altered their courtship behaviour after exposure to antidepressants increasingly found in the natural environment, according to a three-year study conducted by British scientists. Aunt, grandfather, mother, sister, brother. Nonbinary people take on the search for their own familial terms With only a few months left until the 2019 national elections, the Democratic Alliance this week found itself beset with a new crisis — its decision to disavow Broad Based Black Economic Empowerment. The trust board wants people to convert permits into leases, increasing their tenure insecurity After losing two key metros — Johannesburg and Tshwane — during the 2016 local government elections, the ANC in Gauteng has now set its sights on targeting minority groups and young voters Doctors face life-and-death decisions daily, but we rarely think disability grants are one of them The damage caused by the controversial United States policy will only start showing when it’s too late, activists and researchers argue ED Mnangagwa’s slim election victory, followed by violence, has observers asking why he would do this when all he needed was international credibility Exorbitant new fees, introduced just before two elections, will hamper reporting Many compete for the crown of Africa’s finest chilli sauce.
But only Akananga Chilli Oil can wear it China is the biggest market for ivory yet Chinese business people are funding the war on poaching External intervention is needed as the conflict in the Anglophone region worsens Pornography and sex paraphernalia sell like hot cakes online, but physical shops are still doing a roaring trade in erotic accoutrements It is less than local sugar producers wanted and corporates say it entrenches industry efficiencies Platinum giant Impala says it has to cut 13 00 jobs to remain in business, leading government to accuse it of being reckless and a union to threaten strikes at its shafts. Labour brokers were reined in by the Concourt, but they are already trying to exploit loopholes The South African Revenue Service is trying to mend its relationship with big business to increase compliance and tax collections by the end of the financial year. We need to drop race as a category and rather see people according to their different needs ‘Land reform has never been just a nice-to-do. Both for reasons of equity and to provide a base for economic growth, it has always been a have-to-do’ Today, women might be politically free like all other South Africans, but they remain enslaved in the shackles of a predatory patriarchy Our readers write in about government needing to account to taxpayers and President Ramaphosa needing to sign the party funding Bill. It’s in the early morning that things catch up with you and force you to seek relief Two Acts and the Khoi-San Bill, if passed, will dispossess people in the former homelands of their land rights Women who raise their voices against the sexism in this field do so at the risk of their careers Community and government efforts to improve lives in Doornkop, or “Snake Park”, Soweto, is the theme of a new book launched by the residents and the Centre for Social Development in Africa at the University of Johannesburg (UJ). The United Nations has declared that women’s land rights are a human right. Black Power and pan-Africanism became a force that had a powerful effect on the continent itself Employers should encourage mothers to claim their rights to breastfeed at work Why people allow Facebook to make up their minds for them is beyond me and that might be the real question here. What does it mean when “all men are fucked” is the point of reference that good people use about themselves and others? The Cry of Winnie Mandela by Njabulo Ndebele, Lion Songs: Essential tracks in the making of Zimbabwe by Thomas Mapfumo and Johannesburg Hospital 1890 – 1990 by Lorna Schreiber. As We Are by Colbert Mashile, Anecdotes of Sound by Mongezi Ncaphay and Ndoni by Musa Hlatshwayo. History often ignores the role played by women and their struggle against the problems they face Nomvo Booi was as important to the battle against apartheid as her male counterparts Keep your ear to the ground, says Clara Nzima, who rose from production assistant to head of channel Although Transwerke stands strong after 75 years, it has lost some of the pigment its ancient paint job provided. Close up to the exterior, its character blossoms like pimples covered by foundation. To his associates, Ben Sharpa is best remembered as O’ Kaptin My Kap’n. The name, taken from a Walt Whitman poem about the death of Abraham Lincoln An exhibition explores how and why the photographer’s family name shifted from Mokwena to MaQuena in the 1960s An exhibition performance in Pretoria brought out the fans to get a taste of the real thing “The nice thing about football is it always gives you another opportunity to try and win again” It was a great start for Highlands Park in the PSL but the players were hoping for more Innovation and enterprise are key as the Wengers and Fergusons wither The Premier League’s starting pistol will let off anemphatic bang this year. Thanks to a vote by the clubs, the transfer window closed on Thursday