The first two days of the judicial commission of inquiry into state capture dashed hopes of bombshell revelations, and were instead preoccupied with thrashing out the practicalities of what is bound to be an arduous two-year process. The commission, headed by Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo, was appointed to inquire, investigate and make recommendations into allegations of state capture, corruption and fraud in the public sector. Former public protector Thuli Madonsela’s 355-page State of Capture report — and the myriad allegations made against the politically-connected Gupta family — form the basis for the commission’s inquiry into whether there have been deliberate efforts to manipulate state institutions. Those identified in the report as key witnesses to this purported duplicity include former deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas, former ANC MP Vytjie Mentor and the former head of the government communication and information system, Themba Maseko. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.