The Land Will Decide by Setlamorago Mashilo: Questions and disputes concerning land ownership and usage have been prioritised. Mashilo’s exhibition offers a deliberation on issues of displacement, migration, labour, lineage and belonging.
He presents the land as a living entity that takes part in the conversation unfolding in South Africa about its fate. Details: The exhibition is at Everard Read, 6 Jellicoe Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg until August 18. For more information visit everard-read.co.za. The Chocolate Festival: Chocolate lovers have an opportunity to deepen their appreciation for the delicacy in a manner that is no less complex than wine or coffee. All those who go will have chocolate fountains, bakeries, sweet-makers and workshops at their disposal. The festival will also provide live entertainment, bars and gourmet burgers. Details: The festival is at Anura Vineyard, off Simondium Road, Klapmuts, Stellenbosch, on August 18 and 19. Tickets cost R150 a person and can be purchased from webtickets.co.za. Manyano by Mmabatho Montsho: Montsho’s first solo exhibition, curated by Gaisang Sathekge, features oil paintings of the Manyano women of the Methodist Church. Details: The exhibition is at the Women’s Jail in the Constitution Hill precinct, 11 Kotze Street, Hillbrow, Johannesburg, until August 31. For more information call 0113813100. iXesha! by Jabulani Dhlamini: The English translation of the isiXhosa word ixesha is time. Here, the artist uses his photographs to explore the elusive concept of time and the national memory. It includes the response to Winnie Madikizela-Mandela’s recent death and objects that triggered the recollections of individuals who experienced the Sharpeville massacre. Details: The exhibition is at the Goodman Gallery, 176 Sir Lowry Road, Woodstock, Cape Town, until August 25. For more information visit goodman-gallery.com. A George Hallett exhibition: The work of photographer George Hallett, who lived in District Six, includes his series, District Six and Exiles. Details: The exhibition is on at Gallery Momo’s temporary place at Speaker’s Corner, 37 Parliament Street, Cape Town, until August 31. For more information email nicole@gallerymomo.com.  