The inclusion of new coal in the updated draft Integrated Resource Plan for electricity (IRP) will cost South Africa close to R20-billion more than we need to spend, and will make electricity more expensive. If the department of energy were to publish the least-cost plan that civil society organisations have been demanding, it would not include new coal. Allowing the new coal plants to go ahead would be disastrous for water resources, air quality, health, land and the climate. The truth is that coal kills, and no more money should be going into more coal. The Life After Coal Campaign (consisting of Earth life Africa, the Centre for Environmental Rights and ground Work) and Greenpeace Africa argue that the inclusion of an additional 100MW of new coal-fired power — on top of huge amounts of existing and under-construction coal — puts the energy department in conflict with the rights enshrined in the Constitution, given that there are safer, cleaner and less-expensive energy options available. It is important to recognise the increased emphasis on renewable energy, and the potential opportunities that this opens up, but unless the energy minister substantially amends the draft IRP to ensure that the constitutional right to a healthy environment is preserved and protected — and specifically excludes any new coal— the department runs the risk of the IRP being challenged in court. We are now at a tipping point when renewable energy is clearly the cheapest and cleanest electricity option, and more coal in our electricity mix does not make economic sense. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.