Eskom has abandoned its plan to ask the Public Investment Corporation to convert some of its debt to shares out of concern that it will be viewed as default by the market. Former Steinhoff CEO Markus Jooste will be in Parliament on Wednesday to publicly answer questions for the first time related to the collapse of the global furniture retailing group. Old Mutual Investment Group SA, one of the asset manages demanding a forensic investigation into the Resilient group of companies, says share price manipulation allegations that have cost investors almost R130-billion in 2018 are indicative of a broader malaise in ethical leadership in corporate SA. Counterfeit goods and expired food have been confiscated during raids, with health practitioners warning communities from consuming such items. Schoolboys broke down during testimony as they relived the alleged harrowing acts of their former coach choking them until they passed out. Witness Vytjie Mentor’s tears about a faulty hotel door lock and entry card move Inquiry into State Capture head Raymond Zondo to relocate her as her safety is ‘quite a serious matter’. “I couldn’t breathe court hears, but defence claims that assistant water polo coach Collan Rex was “playing”. British Prime Minister Theresa May has assured SA that her government’s looming exit from the European Union will not affect trade relations between the two countries. Man suffers for a month after all his money was stolen online while he was on board a flight to Port Elizabeth. Shortly after his election in late 2015, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau declared “Canada is back,” promising a renewed Canadian presence on the world stage. Trudeau has taken political hits since then for minor lapses, such as a luxury family holiday visit to a Caribbean island and an ill-fated trip to India, but his biggest challenge, just a year before Canadians go to the polls, has come from the leader of Canada’s longtime military ally and economic partner. Now, Canadians worried that their government has been sidelined in crucial trade talks and may be forced to back down on important economic issues, having been outmaneuvered by President Trump and possibly sold out by an erstwhile Mexican ally.  (Washington Post) A project to restore an endangered section of the British countryside – the Celtic rainforest in rural Wales – has been launched with funding from the Welsh government and the EU. Almost £9-million is to be spent trying to protect and improve the wet and temperate forests typically dominated by sessile oak, downy birch, ash and hazel, in an areacriss-crossed by tumbling streams and waterfalls. (The Guardian) For the Venice film festival, at least, 75 is the prime of life.
As the curtain prepares to rise on a landmark edition, it finds itself in robust health, with a lineup packed with major stars, key directors and films that look certain to dominate the awards season. Described by artistic director Alberto Barbera as a “once in a decade lineup” (a description not disputed by critics), the programme includes premieres of films by Mike Leigh, Paul Greengrass, the Coen brothers, Luca Guadagnino – and Orson Welles. And just one woman: Australian director Jennifer Kent. (The Guardian)