The finance ministry has red-flagged a plan by Transport Minister Blade Nzimande to remove a seasoned administrator from the North West department of transport and replace him with his former spokesperson and chief of staff in the higher education department, Nqabekaya Nqandela. Finance Minister Nhlanhla Nene wrote to Nzimande last week asking him to reconsider his decision, saying it was not in the best interests of stabilising the North West government, much of which was placed under national administration after weeks of unrest over shoddy service delivery earlier this year. Nene noted “with concern” that Nzimande intended removing Mathabatha Mokonyama, who had a “wealth of expertise” that had helped to address “inefficiencies within the provincial department”. However, Nzimande’s spokesperson, Ishmael Mnisi, confirmed Nqandela’s appointment. Mokonyama,  a career civil servant and transport specialist, is the deputy director general of the national department of transport, and was appointed as administrator and chief accounting officer of transport in North West when it was placed under administration. Nenehas also asked Nzimande to provide evidence of Nqandela’s qualifications and his ability to act as administrator of the department. Nzimande wrote to Nene last month telling him of his intention to remove Mokonyama and replace him with Nqandela. Nzimande appointed Nqandela as administrator for the Local Government Sector Education and Training Authority in 2013 (LGSeta). Nzimande had also appointed him as his special adviser after taking over the transport portfolio in February this year. In his letter, Nene said of Mokonyama: “Based on his background and experience, he has been able to demonstrate leadership and guidance not only to the transport sector, but he is also assisting other administrators who are new in the process to make informed decisions and how to navigate within the provincial politics. “There[has]been progress and I am concerned that withdrawing Mr Mokonyama will result in regression on the progress made.” Nene wrote that his “humble” request was that Nzimande reconsider his decision in the best interests of North West. Headded that should Nzimande want to press ahead with his decision, he should provide Nqandela’s profile and “documentary evidence of his ability to implement a successful intervention plan through his leadership skills” so that Nqandela could be appointed in terms of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA). A senior higher education official, who had worked under Nzimande, said Nqandela had been appointed “out of loyalty”. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.