Agriculture, fisheries and forestry department employees are intensifying their battle against Minister Senzeni Zokwana, insisting that President Ramaphosa should suspend him pending an investigation by the public protector. South Africa may experience the biggest fuel price increase in the history of the country next month, according to the mid-month unaudited data predictions of the Central Energy Fund release last week by the AA. The fatal stabbing of a teacher in North West has sparked all too familiar fears for KZN teachers. The provincial National Teachers’ Union and the SA Democratic Teachers’ Union said yesterday that members should not be working in fear. The transformation of Naspers, which was founded more than a century ago to produce Dutch language newspaper De Burger, into an online-only behemoth is almost complete. A large government infrastructure fund that can draw in investment and expertise from the private sector is at the centre of President Ramaphosa’s fiscal stimulus proposal, he told a high-level meeting of CEOs and labour leaders at the Union Buildings. The ANC’s desire to keep at a safe distance from the state-capture inquiry came to an abrupt end on Monday. Daily Sun Joburg mayor Herman Mashaba is stepping up efforts to curb crime. He announced yesterday that the city would now release crime statistics every month. Matters came to a head yesterday at the Market Theatre in Johannesburg as staff members downed tools in protest for better salaries. Basic Education Minister Angie Motshekga announced on Monday that Kiswahili has been approved as a language that will be offered to pupils in South African schools. In a thinly veiled attack on ANC secretary general Ace Magashule, President Ramaphosa said those who divide the party were counter-revolutionaries and must be exposed for their actions. Giyani residents are still thirsty The R3.5-billion Giyani Bulk Water project has become a battlefield for political parties ahead of the 2019 elections. The Supreme Court nominee Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh and the woman who has accused him of sexual assault will be called to testify in the Senate on Monday. The hearing effectively delays a planned committee vote on Judge Kavanaugh’s nomination, which had been scheduled for this Thursday. (The New York Times) The British government will have to experience its “darkest hour” and stare into the abyss of a no-deal Brexit before it will cave in to Brussels demands, senior EU diplomats have predicted. (The Guardian) The US is imposing new tariffs on $200-billion worth of Chinese goods as it escalates its trade war with Beijing. (BBC)