Bain & Co partner Vittorio Massone provided suspended South Africa Revenue Service commissioner Tom Moyane with a new structure for the agency before either men even set foot in Sars. The Treasury may write down about R23-billion of its investment in crisis-hit SAA — almost double the provision it made in 2017 — in another distressing sign of the airline’s drain on the public purse Long-standing shareholder dissatisfaction appears to be behind the axing of Alexander Forbes CEO Andrew Darfoor. The Serbian businessman killed in a movie-style drive-by shooting in Ekurhuleni is the latest victim to be murdered in a mostly eastern European mafia gang war that has turned Gauteng into a mini underworld battlefield. Child safety has again come under scrutiny after a man allegedly preyed on a six-year-old girl in a restaurant in Pretoria and later followed her to the toilet and raped her. President Cyril Ramaphosa says the country’s criminal justice system is kicking into gear, as he tackled government and corporate corruption. While staff at the health department’s Civitas Building in Pretoria are protesting the “unsafe” condition of the building, a health practitioner’s dream of opening a clinic was shattered as the strike delayed her application being processed resulting in her losing the entire project. Dozens of black families have allegedly been tricked into buying land on a Tshwane farm only for the stands to be later resold to other people — multiple times. Cape Town City coach Benni McCarthy concedes that his job could be on the line if his team fails again to triumph over SuperSport United in the MTN8 final on Saturday. Egypt is the latest country to build a new capital city from scratch, with ambitions to move parliament away from Cairo as early as summer 2019. With nearly 24 million people living in Greater Metropolitan Cairo, the current Egyptian capital suffers from severe congestion and overcrowding – problems which the government claims the new capital will resolve.
(The Conversation) From Syria to Myanmar and beyond, many of today’s most intractable and brutal conflicts are being documented by everyday internet users equipped with smartphones. But even though they’re documenting vital evidence that could one day help convict perpetrators of atrocities, their footage and photos are at risk from the very platforms that host them. (The Conversation) The European Union, Iran, China and Russia have set out a plan to sidestep unilateral US sanctions designed to cripple the Iranian economy and force the Iranians to renegotiate the nuclear deal signed in 2015. European diplomats hope the proposed measure – known as a special purpose vehicle (SPV) – will help persuade an increasingly reluctant Iran to stay inside the deal in the hope of rescuing its economy. (The Guardian)