Axed North West premier Supra Mahumapelo has declined an appointment to the ANC’s provincial task team, saying he would not be part of the purge currently under way in the ruling party. The task team was set up by Luthuli House to run the ANC in the province until after next year’s national elections. Instead, Mahumapelo has gone on the offensive, accusing the governing party of conducting a “purge” against him since its elective conference at Nasrec in December. The move by the former premier, who is a staunch ally of former president Jacob Zuma and who was recalled over the collapse of the North West government, comes as members of his disbanded provincial executive committee (PEC) prepare to go to court to challenge the decision by the national executive committee (NEC) to remove it from office. Mahumapelo, whose name has been linked to the proposed establishment of a new political party comprising disgruntled Zuma supporters, told ANC secretary general Ace Magashule this week in a letter that he would not accept the post. Mahumapelo had been included in the provincial task team in a bid to create stability in the ANC in the province, and his refusal appears to be his attempt to show the leadership the middle finger. In a letter to Magashule, Mahumapelo said that,although he appreciated the view that he could assist in building the ANC in the province, the provincial task team was the direct result of a “purge” that had been “building since Nasrec”. “There is a group within the NEC and the province which started working on this ‘project dissolve’just before and after Nasrec,” he said. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.