A massive blast at the Rheinmetall Denel Munition facility near Somerset West, which could be heard as far away as Grabouw, has killed eight people. The listeriosis outbreak may be over, but those who lost loved ones are still trying to get recourse through the courts in what is expected to be another multi million-rand payment. Busy Malibongwe Drive connecting the city to the Lanseria International Airport in Joburg was shut down yesterday. President Cyril Ramaphosa’s attempts to clean the rot that spread under his predecessor’s regime and discouraged investment in a sector that once dominated the economy took another step forward after Mineral Resources Minister Gwede Mantashe closed the department’s Mpumalanga office which has been plagued by allegations of corruption. A lack of finance for black investors is holding up Bidvest’s aggressive and serious attempts to dispose of its 38.5 & interest in JSE-listed pharmaceutical firm Adcock Ingram, says Bidvest CEO Lindsay Ralphs. In an unprecedented move that may cost the taxpayer above R300-million, the government has intervened to limit September’s fuel price increases. Faith Muthambi actively “worked against the state” and “wanted to steal public money at any cost” during her tenure as communications minister according to testimony heard at the state capture inquiry. Workers at petroleum giant Sasol are divided over a new empowerment share scheme, which minority interest unions Solidarity considers racist. President Ramaphosa used his address at the opening ceremony of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation in Beijing to rebut claims that China was becoming Africa’s new colonial power. Former president Jacob Zuma doesn’t believe any of the evidence led in the state capture inquiry so far implicates him in criminal or ethical wrongdoing – and has not applied to cross-examine witnesses. A mobile app to anonymously report sexual harassment on Wits University campuses has been created by two students. Tshwane mayor Solly Msimanga appears to have acceded to the demands of the EFF in an effort to hold on to his mayoral chain.