During the day, Bhekukwazi Mdweshu was a detective sergeant at the Durban Central police station, the city’s largest, investigating cases of car theft. But at night Mdweshu (37) was allegedly one of the kingpins in a deadly extortion network, which fleeced residents of the Glebelands Hostel near Umlazi in the south of the city. The group is accused of killing those who refused to pay protection fees and members of rival gangs competing for control of the hostel, run by the eThekwini municipality. They also allegedly murdered several witnesses to their attacks. According to the indictment, Mdweshu allegedly planned the bulk of the nine murders that the group, all of whom lived in Block 52 of the hostel, has been charged for. The policeman, who was arrested in December, also allegedly secured automatic rifles and pistols for their attacks and monitored the movements of some of their victims ahead of them being killed. On Monday the eight men appeared briefly in the high court in Pietermaritzburg on 22 criminal counts, including with racketeering, murder, attempted murder, extortion and possession of illegal arms and ammunition. Mdweshu, Khayelihle Mbuthuma, Vukani Mcobothi, Eugene Wonderboy Hlophe, Ncomekile Ntshangase, Buyiselwa Mkhize, Mondli Mthethwa and Bongani Mbhele are yet to answer to the allegations and have not yet pleaded to the charges. But hopes that the trial would get underway were dashed when the lawyer for Mdweshu, Hlophe and Ntshangase secured an adjournment until September 20 to allow them to secure counsel. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.