Many African countries with poor tobacco controls are an attractive destination for cigarette companies, according to a study on trends in the supply and demand of cigarettes by the University of Cape Town’s Economics of Tobacco Control Project (ETCP). Cigarette consumption in Africa rose by 40% from R165.6-billion to R238.5-billion between 1990 and 2012. The study, by Hana Ross, Marie Perucic and Nicole Vellios, describes the growing use on the continent as an “epidemic”. Ross says: “Tobacco companies are thriving on the continent due to the weak anti-tobacco and tax laws in many African countries.” South Africa is highlighted as a case where new controls have seen cigarette use fall. The study cites a survey in 2015, which found that the smoking population in South Africa decreased from 33% to 20% between 1993 and 2010 and had remained at these levels. In the early 1990s, Egypt and South Africa contributed the most to Africa’s cigarette consumption, each producing about 40-billion sticks a year. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.