Mauricio Pochettino could not contain the frustration. The Tottenham manager had spent much of the time since last Monday’s 3-0 win at Manchester United warning his players that they could not be taken in by the result. There was a difference, he said, between the perception that Spurs were flying and the reality that they could just as easily have lost at Old Trafford.
They had not played well in the first half. The bottom line was that they had to impose themselves from the first whistle against Watford and remain strong throughout. (The Guardian) For the second time in a week the final whistle was José Mourinho’s cue to head directly and pointedly to the Manchester United supporters congregated to his left. He gave them his coat, he gave them his water bottle and, most importantly of all, he gave them what his team could not at Old Trafford on Monday: victory. It was the only offering that mattered for the United manager at Turf Moor. (The Guardian) Romelu Lukaku was back among the goals as he netted a brace to inspire ten-man Manchester United to a 2-0 win over Burnley. Jose Mourinho rang the changes from the loss to Tottenham Hotspur, as Alexis Sanchez, Marouane Fellaini and Victor Lindelof were restored to the line-up. After a slow start to the game, it was one of the changes who made an impact as Sanchez delivered a fine cross for Romelu Lukaku, who headed past Joe Hart to give his side the lead after 26 minutes. (Soccer Laduma) Former Manchester City and Barcelona midfielder Yaya Toure rejoined Olympiakos on Sunday, 12 years after making his mark in Europe with the Greek Super League club. The 35-year-old Ivorian international played for the Piraeus-based side during the 2005-2006 season, scoring three goals in 20 matches. (AFP) A magical Lionel Messi and on-form Luis Suarez scored doubles apiece as champions Barcelona thrashed newly-promoted Huesca 8-2 to join Real Madrid at the top of La Liga on Sunday. Barcelona’s third win of the campaign in as many games saw Ernesto Valverde’s men go top thanks to superior goal difference over Real before the break for Nations League matches. (AFP)