The notion that South Africa needs another state-owned bank, or that a state-owned entity (SOE) should be able to own and run a bank, is a “nonstarter”, experts say. But the treasury has drafted an amendment to the Banks Act that will effectively enable parastatals to apply for a banking licence. It is one of many intended changes to several pieces of legislation contained in the Financial Matters Amendment Draft Bill. It comes alongside a private members Bill, submitted by the Economic Freedom Fighters, proposing a similar change to the Banks Act, aimed at paving the way for a state-owned bank that would compete with commercial banks. But the treasury’s Bill contains several prerequisites that an SOE must meet before it can apply for a banking licence. In a letter, Finance Minister Nhlanhla Nene told the chairperson of the standing committee on finance, Yunus Carrim, that the state-owned company must be solvent (specifically for 24 months prior to applying for a licence, as per the Bill) and receive approval from its shareholder ministry and the minister of finance. Nene said the granting of the licence would be at the discretion of the Prudential Authority of the South African Reserve Bank, which regulates banks, and the Financial Sector Conduct Authority. “These requirements are proposed to limit the fiscal risks of state-owned banks, which, in terms of their founding legislation, may be able to continue to operate despite not being a going concern,” Nene said. This will also bring existing state-owned banks, such as the Land Bank, the Postbank and the KwaZulu-Natal provincial Ithala Bank, which operate with exemptions from the Banks Act, into the financial sector regulatory framework and “will strengthen governance and oversight of these entities”, he said. In a written submission to the committee, Cas Coovadia, the managing director of Banking Association South Africa, said the industry had “no objection to the introduction of the state as a potential owner and/or operator of a bank that will compete with the current banking industry”. But he said such a bank would have to be regulated “under the same legislative, regulatory, prudential, conduct and corporate governance provisions applicable to the current banks, to ensure that there is a level playing field and to ensure consistency and transparency”. In a presentation by treasury officials, Ismail Momoniat, the deputy director general for tax and financial sector policy, and Roy Havemann, the chief director for financial stability and markets, said any state bank wishing to ensure the safety of depositors’ funds would have to act conservatively under the same regulatory oversight. Some existing state-owned banks had already required substantial government support, according to the treasury presentation. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.