Tuesday. Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo looks most fetching in his red-trimmed deep-green robes as he delivers the judgment of the Constitutional Court confirming the Western Cape High Court’s ruling that South Africans may, indeed, possess, smoke and grow cannabis. Granted, I’m biased, given my own affinity for the newly legal holy herb, but the deputy chief justice has the aura of a real-life superhero about him as he works his way, deliberately and precisely, through the unanimous judgment. The earlier high court ruling overturned the ban on growing and possessing cannabis for own use in one’s private space. Zondo’s decorous, sober robes are, in the moment, the cape of a more-than-human righter of wrongs — the cloak of a masked champion of justice, the trademark garment of a single-bound leaper of tall buildings. I’ve known the deputy chief justice for most of my adult life, since I was a long-haired junior reporter at The Mercury and he was a leading labour lawyer operating in the Durban central business district. Back then Zondo was already a top man,a committed, talented, hard grafter with a heart, but today I’m looking at him with very different eyes, like one does when suddenly developing feelings for a person one has known forever. Zondo stops, takes a long drink of water, and continues with the judgment. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.