Gupta-linked Trillian Capital Partners attempted to get Bain & Co a foot in the door at Transnet, one of the country’s strategic state-owned entities that has been dogged by allegations of corruption and mismanagement. African Rainbow Capital Investments started by billionaire Patrice Motsepe and run by two former Sanlam senior executives, has seen its relationship with agroprocessing company BKB descend into acrimony over a proposed share sale. Reserve Bank governor Lesetja Kganyago mounted a strong defence of the institution’s independence, saying the only way it can help lower the cost of capital to support economic growth is by controlling inflation as stated in its constitutionally protected mandate. Former president Thabo Mbeki has weighed in on the land question, saying the ANC has abandoned its historical values on nonracialism through its framing of the debate on land as one of black versus white. The refrain that a week is a long time in politics now holds true in football as it has taken seven days for relations between Kaizer Chiefs fans and coach Giovanni Solinas to take a turn for the worst. An opinion poll suggests there will be no clear winner in Gauteng in the 2019 general election and political parties will have to form coalitions. The survey also says the EFF could double its national support to 13%. The parliamentary manager who shot himself in his office last week laid the blame for his suicide at the door of a former ANC MP. A Bronkhorstspruit family have told of their horror and agony when they went to identify a relative at the Germiston mortuary and found that parts of his body were bitten off by rats. The eyes of the world were on President Cyril Ramaphosa as he unveiled a life-size statue of Nelson Mandela at the UN in New York on Sunday. Three researchers unpack how informal trade between countries on the continent is largely informal. Theresa May’s cabinet has agreed a post-Brexit immigration system that will offer visas to immigrants in a tiered system based on skills and wealth, a flagship policy that is expected to be one of her key announcements to the Conservative party conference next week.
(The Guardian) Brett Kavanaugh, the embattled US supreme court nominee who is fighting to defend himself against mounting allegations of sexual misconduct, has gone on the media offensive, insisting in a TV interview that he was a virgin throughout high school and beyond and that “I have never sexually assaulted anyone in high school or otherwise.” (The Guardian) Kevin Systrom and Mike Krieger, the co-founders of the photo-sharing app Instagram, have resigned and plan to leave the company in the coming weeks, adding to the challenges facing Instagram’s parent company, Facebook. (The New York Times)