Whatever form the government’s stimulus package takes, the business community wants the state to avoid taking on additional debt “at all costs, regardless of whether this is for investment purposes”, said the CEO Initiative’s co-convenor, Jabu Mabuza. “South Africa should stay focused on disciplined fiscal consolidation to create a stable and attractive investment environment that can withstand external shocks to the economy,” Mabuza said. His comments come as the country awaits the details of an economic stimulus package from the government, as well as the closely watched medium-term budget policy statement to be delivered by Finance Minister Nhlanhla Nene on October  24. The cabinet approved the stimulus package this week, and President Cyril Ramaphosa is due to announced the details on Friday (September 21). Investment in infrastructure will form a key part of the stimulus package which will draw in private sector funding and delivery expertise. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.