President Cyril Ramaphosa wants to turn South Africa into a “construction site” as part of his ambitious plan to drag the country out of its current economic quagmire and create much-needed jobs, government insiders told the Mail & Guardian. He plans to jolt the economy back to life with labour-intensive projects that will create jobs for ordinary South Africans and drive consumer spending in the country. Last month, the M&G reported that one of the many proposals under the government’s consideration was to increase social grants in order to stimulate consumer spending. However, during his announcement on the framework of government’s economic stimulus packages last week, Ramaphosa singled out infrastructure as a key target to drive economic activity. Ramaphosa announced plans to establish a South Africa Infrastructure Fund, tobe funded partly by the fiscus and private investors. A senior government leader, who did not want to be named, told the M&G this week that whatever monies were poured into the fund by private stakeholders would be in the form of investments and not loans. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.