While South Africans continue to battle with rising unemployment, poverty and inequality, a World Bank report on doing business in South Africa says there is room for its cities to improve business conditions for small- and medium-sized enterprises. The report, Doing Business in South Africa, compares the regulations and reforms for businesses of 189 economies. The study assesses rules and procedures of doing business in Cape Town, Johannesburg, Mangaung, Tshwane, Msunduzi, Buffalo City, Nelson Mandela Bay, eThekwini and Ekurhuleni. It assessed the time, cost and procedures of these cities based on five indicators. These include cost and time for small and medium enterprises to register a property, get an electricity connection and a construction permit, resolve a commercial dispute through the courts and transfer a title deed from one business to another. The latest World Bank report shows that since its last report in 2015, some cities have implemented reforms and improved regulation for entrepreneurs to initiate or expand their businesses. Johannesburg has become the fastest location in the country to register property and get an electricity connection, followed by Cape Town and eThekwini. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.