Comic Con Africa: The three-day event will feature comic books, sci-fi and fantasy films, animation, toys, gadgets, clothing, collectable cards, manga, webcomics and virtual reality. Gamers can also take part in tournaments, cosplay, panel discussions and workshops. 
Details: September 14 to 16 at the Kyalami Grand Prix Circuit, corner R55 andAllendale Road, Midrand. Tickets cost R120 to R350 and can be purchased from Computicket. For more information visit comicconafrica.co.za. offstage by Frances Goodman: A solo exhibition of new works by Frances Goodman includes photography, sculpture and sound to depict contemporary ideas of beauty and desire. Details: The exhibition is on until October 13 at the Smac Gallery, 19 Keyes Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg. For more information visit smacgallery.com. Mama, I Want the Black that You Are: This theatre production is based on a collection of interviews with people living with albinism. It tells a tale of the relationship between Matlakala, a 15-year-old and her mother. Details: The production is on until September 16 at the Soweto Theatre, corner of Bolani Link and Bolani Road, Jabulani, Soweto. Tickets cost R50 and can be purchased from web-tickets.co.za. For more information on show times, email mambila@sowetotheatre.org.za. Lwanda Gogwana at The Orbit: The trumpeter and composer brings melodies from his Songbook Chapter 1 and his 2016 release Uhadi Synth. The performance will be a preview of what to expect at this year’s Standard Bank Joy of Jazz festival. Joining Gogwana at The Orbit is Lifa Arosi on piano and synths, Keenan Chas Ahrends on guitar, Thembinkosi Mavimbela on the bass and Lungile Kunene on drums. Details: September 14 at The Orbit, 81 De Korte Street, Braamfontein, Johannesburg. Tickets cost R140 and can be bought in advance by emailing info@theorbit.co.za orat the door. For more information visit theorbit.co.za. Franschhoek Uncorked Festival: Explore Franshhoek’s winemakers and sample wines made by Franschhoek’s vintners. Highlights include tastings, a variety of meals, live music and lawn games. Details: The festival will take place on September 15 and 16 at the Franschhoek Wine Valley, 62 Huguenot Road, Franschhoek. A weekend pass gives you access to all participating wine farms and includes a complimentary tasting glass and wine tastings. The pass costs R150 and is available from webtickets.co.za. For more information visit franschhoekuncorked.co.za.AdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads