Trade union federation Cosatu has resolved to amend its constitution to allow it to take control of affiliated unions that are experiencing leadership problems and divisions. The decision, taken at Cosatu’s 13th congress in Midrand, will curb the autonomy of affiliated unions, which has rendered them almost impenetrable to interventions by the federation’s leaders. New Cosatu president Zingiswa Losi told the Mail & Guardian that the ability to intervene in problematic unions would ensure better services for members and, ultimately, entice more workers to join affiliated unions. “What is key is to enable the federation to make decisive interventions. At the same time that resolution must not give us too much power,” Losi said. “In other words, leaders of the federation must not be able to create problems in unions, just so that they can take control.” The federation also resolved to help specific unions— the South African Transport and Allied Workers’ Union, the Chemical, Energy, Paper, Printing, Wood and Allied Workers’ Union and the South African Municipal Workers’ Union (Samwu)  — to “consolidate their unity and the renewal process”. Samwu was absent from the congress after defaulting on its affiliation fee to Cosatu, despite members paying their required fee to the union. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.