Despite “much umbrage and professed indignation”, Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan had brought few facts to disprove that he was racist towards former Transnet board member Seth Radebe, Dali Mpofu SC said in court papers. When Gordhan was appointed as public enterprises minister in February, he made sweeping changes to the boards of state-owned enterprises to return them to financial viability and address allegations of corruption and state capture. Mpofu will represent Radebe at what is viewed as the first legal push-back to these changes. At the urgent application, scheduled to be heard in the high court in Pretoria on Monday, Radebe will argue that Gordhan removed him from the board unlawfully and that the new board should be dissolved. Gordhan has rejected Radebe’s claim of racial discrimination, saying there was “wholesale looting” at Transnet. He says since his appointment he has been determined to prevent malfeasance and recover losses. The chair of the Transnet board, Popo Molefe, has entered the fray, saying that if the court were to declare the appointment of the board unlawful, it would potentially “cripple Transnet ... This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.