If the secretary-general of the ANC, the governing party’s de facto CEO, is to be believed, his get-together with Jacob Zuma was just one big coincidence. The foreign investment community is waiting for the outcome of SA’s general election in 2019 to see which policies will be formulated and enacted before committing to the country, said a senior analyst at Moody’s Investors Service. Mall owner Resilient has resisted the call by some of SA’s largest institutional investors for an independent investigation into the company and its associates. Terrifying crime statistics revealing that 57 people are brutally murdered daily paints an ugly picture of a country under siege. Sandton, the richest square mile in Africa, has made it onto the top 30 national list of areas in which people are not safe in their homes. President Cyril Ramaphosa has confirmed that the government will start implementing lifestyle audits on Cabinet members from next month, saying no minister will escape the process. With 57 people being killed each day, and mob justice and gang-related murders leading the pack, coupled with a rise in sexual offences, violent crime was a danger to everyone in the country, the chairperson of the parliamentary portfolio committee on police said on Tuesday. A black farm owner was forced to turn to minority rights group AfriForum after police allegedly failed to help him remove land grabbers who had occupied his farm outside Pretoria. The Minister says the SAPS is in a far worse state than when he was fired as commissioner in 2011. If ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule is to be believed, it was all just one big coincidence, and SA should not be fussing about it. Financial markets are worried about the economic turbulence in emerging economies. But new research is exploring how nearly one in four emerging economies has achieved rapid and consistent growth over long periods.
(Financial Times) The banker called a whistle-blower hotline with ethics concerns. He later decided to leave the firm after his bosses — including the incoming chief executive — urged him to let the complaints go. (The New York Times) The US State Department has said it is deeply concerned over China’s “worsening crackdown” on minority Muslims in China’s northwestern territory of Xinjiang as the Trump administration reportedly considers sanctions against senior Chinese officials and companies linked to allegations of human rights abuses. (The Guardian)