Not everyone believes a stimulus package will get the country out of its economic crisis A related problem is that its maintenance and repair company could lose lucrative contracts North West agriculture MEC Manketsi Tlhape is alleged to have taken 44 cattle, worth more than R500 000, meant for an emerging farmer in her hometown of Delareyville. On Thursday one suspect appeared in the Umzimkhulu Magistrate’s Court for Magaqa’s murder. Police say another suspect was killed in a shootout with the police. The arrest of six men for the killing of a former councillor has rocked the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal “Every evening, I would go to the ICU and sit by her bedside.
I’d hold her hand and pray, ‘Lord, give her another chance. She is no more a sinner than I am.’” But the ANC’s secretary general said he would never give up on former president Jacob Zuma Ashu Chawla’s whereabouts remain unknown and the explanation his lawyer has given to MPs eagerly anticipating his testimony is suspicious Colin Coleman and Cyril Ramaphosa go way back, and the Goldman Sachs banker has the ear of ANC policy gurus — but his tough recipe for growth won’t have labour salivating The cash to give it to them has been spent, but corruption and waste have left them without ‘Ghost” ANC members who had died and were allegedly kept on branch membership lists to inflate numbers ahead of December’s national elective conference at Nasrec continue to haunt the party in Mpumalanga, despite attempts by the national leadership to exorcise them. As deadly fires tear through unsafe buildings in Gauteng, civil servants tell state: ‘We warned you’ The department of environmental affairs wants trout declared an invasive alien species, which will add them to a list of species that need to be removed from South Africa. A clan’s claim to prime areas of the capital has been dogged by controversy North West ANC regions are becoming increasingly divided over whether to challenge in court the dissolution of the party’s provincial executive committee (PEC), with one of its biggest regions, Bojanala, calling for action against those who do so. The city’s lawyer says the mayor put pressure on him to protect an official facing corruption charges Connecting things, not just people, at ever-increasing speeds is where growth is taking plac Apple has announced three new phones and a redesigned smartwatch at its annual iPhone event on Wednesday in California Dimitri Tsafendas, the man who killed the architect of apartheid, was an enigmatic ‘revolutionary’ with a ‘deep social conscience’ Until two years ago, this man helped property developers push drug users out of gentrifying neighbourhoods. Then this happened In the wake of acid attacks, victims — often women — can feel hopeless. Now, women around the world fighting back The opposition’s leader has closely imitated Raila Odinga’s strategy but the Kenyan politician’s end result is a cautionary tale African states have bet big on huge hydroelectric plants, but climate change is threatening rainfall Proposed high fees will make it impossible for those reporting at grassroots level to continue South Sudan’s President Salva Kiir and rebel leader Riek Machar signed a much-anticipated peace deal on Wednesday, the latest attempt to end five years of civil war that’s torn the world’s youngest nation apart. China is not always the largest lender and Chinese companies sometimes act in their own interests Writing off debts of the poor, as laid out in a Bill before Parliament, may take up to seven years Atchar can be enjoyed with curry, vetkoek, which is also called magwinya, or the uniquely South African bunny chow called kota. The treasury’s proposed changes paving the way for SOE banks come with strict conditions, but analysts point to already troubled institutions Global growth has been surprisingly strong, but the surge in buybacks is limiting expenditure and could cause more political turmoil Many African countries with poor tobacco controls are an attractive destination for cigarette companies, according to a study on trends in the supply and demand of cigarettes We should be taught from a young age to think critically about our own perspectives ‘Twenty million South Africans don’t have reliable access to clean water. Twenty million. That’s a third of the population. And it’s a conservative number.’ ‘Caveat lector: Former president Jacob Zuma says state capture is political hocus pocus’ Our readers write in about Chagos, Coca-Cola, and a new reader gives us feedback Was that Maharani meeting about spices? And how does a kid get his gaming ban lifted? Among the most serious threats to a prosperous and inclusive South Africa is the stubbornly high rate of unemployment among young people. Years of incompetent government in the service of irresponsible oligarchs has left the country in ruins The national security adviser’s jingoism has also reduced the space to discuss what global justice should be The Broederbond itself — dedicated to ensuring the supremacy of Afrikaners —was split into verkrampte and verligte tendencies Puffing away on nicotine is unhealthy and socially no longer acceptable, but people do struggle to give it up The colonisation of higher education by neoliberalism is a sinister assault on academic freedom Prison should not be where you want a child to go to take a break from an addiction, but social services in Zimbabwe are almost nonexistent. Comic Con Africa, offstage by Frances Goodman,Mama, I Want the Black that You Are Ginger Me Slowly by Somi, Amaculo, Rediscovering the Genius of Bheki Mseleku A new South African film focuses on food and how it can be central to relationships Fordsburg is a mix of Indian, Pakistani, Somali, Turkish, Ethiopian and Syrian cultures. The court records of cardiologist and South African Defence Force chemical warfare head Wouter Basson had disappeared from public sight when playwright and publisher Maggie Davey got hold of them in 2012. A play about coming to terms wil living with serious illness is an indictment of society It’s fun, it gets you moving, it’s trap. But Boity and Nasty C fail to be innovative DJ Luvvas is a Durban dude whose song Ramaphosa is spiked with double meaning Nomasonto’s story may be a short one, but the two minutes are a beautiful glimpse into a vibrant city and its thriving culture. An artist questions the relationship between Switzerland and apartheid South Africa The two teams have become the big boys but swollen egos could lead to their downfall A trip to Newcastle’s St James’s Park means more to Gooners than to most other sets of fans in the Premier League. It’s the podcast you never knew you wanted. Arguably the most widely reviled figure in recent sporting history interviewing others about their mistakes; chewing the cud over repercussions and redemption. They’re having to learn new skills to provide support at the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing The battle with the Soweto giants looms and City is one game away from equalling last season’s best It’s clear that Free State Stars coach Luc Eymael is fed up with having to explain away his side’s poor results at the start of the season.