SA will struggle to register barely positive growth for 2018. That is the reality facing President Ramaphosa, six months after he was swept to power on a wave of optimism that he would reverse the decay of the Zuma years. MTN’s Nigerian nightmare shows no sign of abating. Not a week after being hit with a shock $8.1-billion claim by Nigeria’s central bank, MTN shares dived a further 17% on Tuesday to close at their lowest in 12 years. Discovery’s emerging businesses pay off Discovery saw all of its emerging businesses turn profitable for the full year to June as the group positions itself as a global financial services player. In what could be seen as a blow to President Ramaphosa’s presidency, South Africa has officially entered a technical recession. Another ANC leader gunned down The ANC in eThekwini said it was saddened by the brutal killing of its ward 12 leader. Thulani Nxumalo was gunned down while entering his home at Kwandengezi on Monday night. South Africa lost a potential R1-trillion in gross domestic product to bad governance during the last few years of Jacob Zuma’s term, according to Nedbank chief economist, Dennis Dykes. The Tshwane Metro Police Department chose to remain tight lipped on whether they have a firearm ammunition shortage, but assured residents of adequate services. A fresh protest that saw bins burnt and the main campus of the Tshwane University of Technology trashed on Tuesday has left students divided. ANC MP Vincent Smith has asked to be removed as chairperson of Parliament’s constitutional review committee until a probe into allegations that he received large sums of money from a private consortium is finalised. The cash-strapped SABC has been handed a R1.2-billion government guarantee to allow it to be able to borrow much-needed money from commercial banks. Cosatu has slammed SACP general secretary and transport minister Blade Nzimande, saying he was speaking out of turn and without a mandate from the ANC-led tripartite alliance by justifying the continued use of e-tolls on Gauteng roads. Senate Democrats tore into Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh, painting him as a narrow-minded partisan while the remainder of the hearing verged on pandemonium. Judge Kavanaugh, who finally had the microphone hours later, portrayed himself as an impartial jurist and affable family man. (The New York Times) The NHS could face a bill of almost £500-million a year to hire overseas staff as a result of Brexit and the government’s immigration policies, hospital doctors have said. (The Guardian) Almost four million children in the UK live in households that would struggle to afford to buy enough fruit, vegetables, fish and other healthy foods to meet the official nutrition guidelines, a groundbreaking food poverty study reveals. (The Guardian) Jebi, or “swallow” in Korean, was briefly a super typhoon and is the most powerful storm to hit Japan in 25 years. (Reuters) The United Nations says the rival militia factions that have been fighting in Libya’s capital Tripoli for the past week have agreed a ceasefire. At least 47 people have been killed and 1,800 families internally displaced by the violence, officials say. (BBC)