Tshwane University of Technology (TUT) has suspended academic activities at its Soshanguve North and South campuses until further notice. The university has also issued suspension letters to students allegedly involved in recent protests. The students, a media statement released on Monday, “were identified as perpetrators of the ongoing protest action and damage to TUT property”. TUT management made the decision on Monday morning following ongoing disruptions at both campuses. “Due to the volatility of the situation and the risk to the safety of staff and students, the University had no choice but to come to this decision, which aims to normalise the situation at the institution,” the university said in a statement. TUT said it would increase security “to ensure the safety of the campus community once activities resume”. Academic activity at Soshanguve North and South campuses had been reinstated following the university’s decision to suspend all academic activity across its six campuses following the death of law student Katlego Monareng. Monareng was allegedly shot by a police officer following a protest against a perceived “rigged” student representative council (SRC) election outside Soshanguve north campus in August. “For their own safety, all students are encouraged to vacate residences at these campuses while activities are suspended,” the statement noted. “The Campus Rector will manage the process to assist in terms of accommodation for international students, work integrated learning students and students who can provide exceptional reasons.” On September 7, the university obtained an interdict from the high court in Pretoria to “assist in normalising the situation at the institution”. The university had sixteen respondents: participants in the protest action at campuses of the Tshwane University of Technology, Gift Mabuza, Mtlolosi Mayesela, Sthembiso Ncube, Nudmiso Muhlanga,  Thabang Boima, Sduduzo Zulu, Sthembiso Ndlovu, Dumisani Dludlu, Kawu Mbele, EFF Student Command (TUT branch), Pan African Student Movement of Azania, Radical Student Movement, Occupy4FreeStudent, district commander of the Tshwane police service, and the public order policing unit for Tshwane. “The interdict will be enforced to prevent perpetrators of the ongoing unrest and damage to TUT property from entering the Soshanguve North and South campuses,” the statement continued. “[The interdict] will be enforced to prevent any person from participating in any disruptive activities on these campuses.” Despite the delay in resuming academic activities, TUT has said that year-end examinations will start as scheduled on November 12.