While the MTN8 title has eluded Mamelodi Sundowns coach Pitso Mosimane yet again, it appears Benni McCarthy has a love affair with this competition. In a repeat of last season’s final, Cape Town City will face SuperSport United on September 29 in a venue yet to be decided by the Premier Soccer League. City came to Atteridgeville with a single goal advantage from last weekend’s first leg in the Mother City and were determined to not only protect it, but add to their tally as well.
(The Star) Cape Town City will play SuperSport United in the MTN8 final at the end of September after they beat Mamelodi Sundowns 4-2 on penalties following a bruising semi-final encounter at Lucas Moripe Stadium on Sunday. (Business Day) In urging Kaizer Chiefs supporters to “move on” from Saturday night’s defeat to SuperSport United in the MTN8 semi-finals, which meant another opportunity to end the club’s trophy drought had been missed, coach Giovanni Solinas boldly claimed that he’s yet to tap into the team’s maximum potential. (The Star) Kaitano Tembo was modest in victory, wanting only to entertain talk of having achieved something with SuperSport United — for the first time as head coach — when there’s an actual trophy in the club’s cabinet. (The Star) Under his guidance, Matsatsantsa scored a narrow 1-0 win on Saturday night to progress to the September 29 cup final of the MTN 8 thanks to a 3-2 aggregate score. The PSL transfer window closed on Friday but there are many players who are still clubless and eligible to sign at any time like Mzikayise Mashaba, Ayabulela Konqobe, Travis Graham, Tsepo Masilela, Tendai Ndoro, Tshepo Gumede, Lehlohonolo Masalesa and Tefu Mashamaite. (Sowetan) Orlando Pirates have confirmed the signing of a defender after he impressed during his trial with the club under coach Milutin Sredojevic and his technical team. “Orlando Pirates Football Club is delighted to announce the signing of Caio Marcelo from Nova Iguaçu Football club,” confirmed Bucs on the club’s official website. (Soccer Laduma) Jabu ‘Shuffle’ Mahlangu is on course to unearth untapped football talent from around South Africa in his new role. The retired footballer, whose one role among the various he is busy with is being that of television analyst, is part of a football scouting initiative for aspiring U15 footballers from around the country at schools level. (Soccer Laduma)