Embattled consultancy Bain & Company announced on Sunday that managing partner Vittorio Massone has stepped down. The action follows revelations by the Mail & Guardian on Friday that SAA executives failed in attempts to award the company a flawed R139-million contract to develop an optimal organisational design. The manner in which Bain evidently campaigned for the tender is eerily similar to its dealings with the South African Revenue Service that came under the spotlight at the Nugent Commission last week. Massone’s testimony revealed that he had met Tom Moyane months before he was appointed Sars commissioner. Additionally, pro-bono work from the consultancy led to it eventually being paid more than R200-million to restructure the revenue service. As reported in the M&G, one of the concerns raised by SAA’s bid adjudication committee in rejecting the first attempt to award Bain with a contract was that it had already been doing pro-bono work in SAA chief executive Vuyani Jarana’s office.
Unbeknown to the committee, Jarana had met Massone and discussed the airline months before the former took up his position. Tiaan Moolman, who is described as a long serving member, will be appointed to run South African operations in the interim. In addition to Massone stepping down, Bain announced that it will be paying back all of the money it was paid by Sars. “Bain & Company’s global Board today approved to set aside all of the R164-million of fees plus VAT and interest, from our work with Sars,” the consultancy said in its statement on Sunday. “This money will be used either as prescribed by the Nugent Commission of Inquiry or – in the absence of such prescription - for the benefit of South Africa. In the latter instance, we will seek guidance from business, government and civil society leaders on how these funds can best be used.” The consultancy has also established an “oversight committee” headed by a former alumnus. Bain follows in the footsteps of disgraced auditors KPMG who have also been implicated in state capture, allegedly siphoning hundreds of millions of rands from the state for questionable services. The auditing firm is also desperately trying to salvage its local and international reputation through a series of exercises.