Zwakele Mncwango will lead the Democratic Alliance’s campaign to “bring real change to Kwazulu-Natal” as the party’s premier candidate for the 2019 elections. DA leader Mmusi Maimane made this announcement on Thursday at the historic Ohlange High School in Inanda. Maimane emphasised the party’s confidence in Mncwango’s leadership, saying: “Zwakele has a vision for KZN that will see access to jobs for all, the eradication of poverty and inequality, and where all are united in our diversity – where it be race, religion or culture.” Mncwango started by canvassing for the party as a branch member and gradually rose through the ranks, becoming the party’s provincial leader. Mncwango also serves on the DA’s federal executive and federal council. Maimane said the province is a “striking example” of the “betrayal of the people” by today’s ANC and its leaders. “The dominance of the ANC means they have become complacent and focused on enriching only themselves. 
Not only have they failed to create jobs for the people of KZN or keep them safe from crime, they don’t even know how to.” According to Maimane, the province has the potential to create jobs and opportunities but instead of this happening, political killings are rampant, “crime is rising, corruption is oppressing us and there is no fair access to jobs”. “There is no doubt that the ANC’s patronage network, in-fighting for resources in government, and other internal ANC battles are the reasons behind these political killings. While the ANC fight each other, no one is fighting for the people of KZN,” Maimane said. Mncwango will lead a team that will prioritise removing a “corrupt ANC” and serving the people, the party’s leader said. “Today, we desperately need a new generation of 21st century leaders to lead the charge in removing the failing and corrupt ANC from government. I have no doubt Mncwango represents such a generation. “From today, he will lead a team that will be committed to fighting corruption, working to fix the police service in the province so that it focuses on actually protecting and serving the people of KZN, fighting the scourge of drug abuse, creating fair access to real and long-term jobs and working to speed up the delivery of basic services to our people,” Maimane announced.