The Gauteng health department is battling two deadly diseases that killed 15 infants in hospitals. Apart from klebsiella pneumoniae, health officials in an unnamed provincial hospital are struggling to contain a breakout of necrotising enterocolitis, which has claimed the lives of nine babies so far. A war is brewing between parents of sexually abused boys from Parktown Boy’s High School and the Gauteng department of education as the aftermath of paedophile Collan Rex’s sordid acts continues to rage. Faced with the possibility that he might not be the next president of South Africa, given Cyril Ramaphosa’s “new dawn” appeal, DA leader Mmusi Maimane chose a safer bet by aiming to be the next premier of the Western Cape. South Africa needs to beware of falling into a “Chinese debt trap”, the Democratic Alliance warned on Sunday. Student killed at KZN varsity Chaos erupted at one of the University of Zululand’s campus’ yesterday after a student was stabbed to death. The proposed demerger and separate listing of Investec Asset Management from the wider group could propel the business into the “super league” and in doing so, unlock substantial value for shareholders. Electricity supplier Eskom is set to miss yet another of its self-imposed deadlines to finalise the appointment of its sixth finance director in five years. Cosatu affiliates were on Sunday involved in last-minute lobbying to find consensus on who should be the trade union federation second deputy president as it begins its congress today. The ANC Youth League in Mpumalanga has vowed not to nominate “old people for Parliament in next year’s national and provincial elections The IFP wants a full inquiry into the killing of the organisation’s publicity secretary Zakhele Mazibuko, who was ambushed on Saturday night. The loss-making SABC says it has to consider job cuts as it struggles to generate enough cash flow to remain sustainable. The bodies of the five zama zamas who tragically died in a rockfall last week were found in an open veld yesterday near Angelo squatter camp in Ekurhuleni. A woman has accused Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh, the Supreme Court nominee, of sexual assault when the two were teenagers. He has denied the allegations. Two Republicans on the Senate Judiciary Committee opened the door to a potential delay in a panel vote scheduled for Thursday. (The New York Times) Typhoon Mangkhut battered Hong Kong and Macau on Sunday with 100 miles-per-hour wind gusts, drenching rains and 11-foot surges of seawater that inundated the first urban area of Asia to face the wrath of the year’s mightiest storm. (The New York Times) As the death toll from Florence rose and hundreds were rescued from their flooded homes, North Carolina slid into the next stage of the disaster: catastrophic flooding. (The Guardian) Two Russians accused of a nerve agent attack in the UK have admitted they visited the city where the assault took place, but say the purpose of their brief trip was to visit its historic cathedral and not to poison a former double agent who happened to live there. (CNN)