Communications Minister Nomvula Mokonyane has moved to withdraw a bill that was described as a “power grab” of the SABC by then minister Faith Muthambi, who has been linked to allegations of state capture. A close relative of Kessie Nair, who went on a racist rant, using the k-word to describe President Ramaphosa, said Nair was declared mentally unstable when he was released from prison in 2011. Parliament has been given the green light to go ahead with its plans to pass legislation allowing naming and shaming of fraudsters using fake qualifications in an online public register. The Reserve Bank will walk a tightrope when it hands down its latest interest rate decision, torn between a worsening inflation outlook and an economy that is in the midst of its first recession in a decade. The business rescue practitioner working to stabilise and sell Gupta-owned mines and operations is facing the 44th legal bid for 2018 to scupper its efforts, this time from Swiss shell company Charles King. Zwane ‘leaned on CEO to keep Gupta accounts open’ The testimony by witnesses from SA’s major banks has pointed to former mineral resources minister Mosebenzi Zwane as the key player fighting against a decision to close the Gupta family’s bank accounts. Daily Sun Sitting on the floor at the National School of the Arts, Dr Esther Mahlangu was surrounded by about 20 pupils and she taught a class on her craft. Former deputy minister of higher education Mduduzi Manana is not yet out of the woods as police have now confirmed that they are still investigating the case of assault opened by his domestic worker. The confrontation between Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh and his accuser, Christine Blasey Ford, devolved into a stalemate, as Democrats and Republicans advanced competing narratives. Barring new information or an agreement by Dr. Blasey to testify, Judge Kavanaugh may now have enough momentum to be confirmed as early as next week on a party-line vote. (The New York Times) Theresa May has urged EU leaders to focus their minds on getting a Brexit deal in the next two months, saying negotiations will not be extended. (BBC)