Proposals by ANC secretary general Ace Magashule that the party’s integrity commission, which investigates claims of corruption or misconduct by its members,acts on the instruction of his office have been shot down by the party’s national leadership. The ANC national working committee (NWC),at a recent meeting, rejected placing the commission under the control of the secretary general’s office. Instead, the NWC, which meets on September 28, and the national executive committee (NEC), which sits the same day, are likely to ratify an autonomous integrity commission able to initiate its own investigations. Two NWC members, who asked not to be named, confirmed the integrity commission would be “getting to work” after its terms of reference and membership are ratified by the NEC. “Conference said the integrity commission must be set up by the NWC and the NEC by the end of June. It has been set up and the membership discussed by the NWC. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.