There appears to be little progress on any criminal cases relating to the collapse of household goods retailer Steinhoff, which may explain why former chief executive Markus Jooste appeared relatively unfazed in Parliament this week. A self-assured Jooste, flanked by four legal representatives, told MPs he knew nothing of “accounting irregularities” at the firm. Jooste’s testimony, his first public appearance after what has been described at the largest corporate scandal in South Africa, came a week after the head of the Hawks’ specialised commercial crimes unit told MPs of the stumbling blocks in the Steinhoff cases. Major General Alfred Khana told the standing committee on finance “there is a not a shred of evidence” given under oath in the three main Steinhoff dockets opened with the police that would allow the Hawks to question individuals or to approach a prosecutor for a warrant of arrest. The issue has come at a time when the police unit is having to deal with other large corruption cases stemming from state capture allegations, all of which involve complex financial transactions. Civil society organisations and criminal justice experts have raised concerns about the ability of the Hawks and other law enforcement agencies — after years of being hollowed out under former president Jacob Zuma’s administration — to successfully manage and investigate these complex matters. In mid-August, at a meeting of the portfolio committee on police, the newly appointed head of the Hawks, Lieutenant General Godfrey Lebeya gave a 54-page presentation detailing the many high-profile crimes the unit is dealing with, all of which involve complicated financial manoeuvring and vast sums of money. They include the fraud, corruption and money-laundering investigation of Transnet’s procurement of 1 064 locomotives, involving R36.8-billion; fraud, corruption and money-laundering investigations at Eskom relating to the prepayment to Tegeta to enable it to buy the Optimum Coal Mine, involving more than R2-billion; and the infamous Estina dairy case, involving more than R280-million. These cases come on top of investigations recently launched into the collapse of VBS Mutual Bank and the Steinhoff matter. Lebeya told parliamentarians the Hawks did not have enough financial investigators, according to minutes from the Parliamentary Monitoring Group (PMG) and, as a result, outside forensic firms had to be contracted to assist in complex investigations. But, he said, the Hawks were addressing this as part of an overall restructuring to “capacitate the institution”. The Hawk’s spokesperson Brigadier Hangwani Mulaudzi said there was “an exodus of members” from the Hawks, which had a direct effect on service delivery. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
 As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.