A looting spree has rocked a multimillion-rand community development project in Ekurhuleni, with one company allegedly invoicing the city R22 000 for one steel bench. Parliament and three unions have lauded the move by Ipid to suspend the crime-busting unit’s major-general Zinhle Mnonopi in the wake of allegations by former deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas that she tried to force him to sign a false statement. Police Minister Bheki Cele talked tough again yesterday, telling officers “not to be kind” when faced with killers. The Democratic Alliance has submitted an application to MultiChoice in terms of the Promotion of Access to Information Act to request access to the full terms of agreement between MultiChoice and its new 24-hour news channel, Newzroom Afrika, the party said yesterday. In the wake of allegations yesterday that EFF leader, Julius Malema’s security unit, known as the Defenders of the Revolution, beat up and shot live rounds at EFF members in the Vaal on Saturday night, further details have emerged about what possibly happened. Former Public Enterprises Minister Barbara Hogan is lined up to testify at the state capture commission in the next few weeks as the evidence leaders seek to corroborate the events leading up to former president Jacob Zuma’s 2010 Cabinet reshuffle. A Limpopo mayor, Andrina Matsemela, has allegedly splurged almost R70 000 on a three day business trip to Cape Town International consultancy Bain & Co has launched an internal investigation into its work for Sars after shocking information emerged at the commission of inquiry into governance at the tax agency. McKinsey accused of complicity in cartel McKinsey & Co has been cast into the centre of the probe into cartel conduct in the cement industry, with evidence emerging that the global consultancy advised cement producers to undermine competitors by secretly conspiring. Reuters journalists Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe Oo were found guilty of breaking a colonial-era law on state secrets. Press-freedom advocates, the UN, European Union, US, and other countries have called for the journalists’ acquittal. In a statement, Reuters’s editor-in-chief called the verdict “a major step backward in Myanmar’s transition to democracy.” (Reuters) The Museu Nacional houses artefacts from Egypt, Greco-Roman art and some of the first fossils found in Brazil. (The Guardian)