The Independent Police Investigative Directorate has been asked to investigate perjury charges against a KwaZulu-Natal police general for allegedly lying under oath to the Moerane commission of inquiry into political killings in the province. Vanessa Burger, who testified at the commission, has also written to national police commissioner Khehla Sitole asking him to investigate Major General Dumezweni Chiliza, the deputy provincial commissioner responsible for investigations and a former Umlazi cluster commander. This is for allegedly lying in his testimony to the commission in February and March. In her complaint, which has also been sent to Parliament’s portfolio committee on policing, Burger said Chiliza had lied when he told the commission he had not been aware of threats to the life of state witness Sipho Ndovela. Ndovela, a witness in an attempted murder case against deceased Glebelands hitman Bongani Hlophe, was shot dead in the Umlazi magistrate’s court parking lot on May 18 2015 while under police protection. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.