Transfers were made from Brian Shivambu’s company for the property in Fourways A report by retired judge Kathy Satchwell exonerates Zackie Achmat and Doron Isaacs An atmosphere of mistrust hangs over the airline’s board, its chief executive and its minister After a spat between MPs over post-school qualifications, the M&G dataset reveals more than half of MPs have university degrees A KwaZulu-Natal municipality paid Ishwar Ramlutchman, but no boreholes were drilled The party has insisted that the former president’s appearance will not be used by groups for political gain We look at her history in the water department to see what the reshuffle means for Mokonyane’s new portfolio If you are a human being, a human being in South Africa, and you see a black person like you, doing that to you, what does it mean? The University of Pretoria’s new vice-chancellor has set his sights on the opportunities that going continental offers Judges and justice department employees have been charged with discrimination and corruption The salaries of the nine izinduna from the Nobamba tribal authority were suspended because of a boundary dispute in which izinduna from the uSuthu tribal authority have claimed authority over their area. The party should have place itself first in the queue to give evidence at the Zondo commission The former head of the GCIS dragged up the red-herring of white monopoly capture Greenpeace was inflammatory and Eskom had to come clean, but it continues to foul the air Research shows criminalising sex workers does almost nothing to stop it and almost everything to make it more dangerous, including pushing up HIV infection rates. Is it time for a change? At the African forensics school, students learn to manage death with dignity Ecological degradation and global warming is drying up Lake Chilwa and thus devastating people’s livelihoods The activist politician will run for president next year, taking on the patriarchy at the same time Thanks Eskom. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.