The 2017 school year began with tensions between the Gauteng department of education and two high schools in Pretoria, Hoërskool Overkruin and Hoërskool Montana, which had refused to admit English-speaking pupils. In January, violent scenes played out at Hoërskool Overvaal in Vereeniging, south of Johannesburg, between black and white parents about the school’s decision not to accept 55 English-speaking pupils. Now the province’s government is hoping its new feeder zone regulations — announced by the Gauteng education MEC, Panyaza Lesufi, last month for public comment — will mean these tensions will be a thing of the past. In an interview with Mail & Guardian this week, the department’s deputy director general, Albert Chanee, said the regulations will ensure that public schools service everyone and are optimally used. No school will be able to turn away pupils based on the language they speak and children will be able to attend schools in the area where they live, regardless of their race or class. With the new feeder zone system, preferential rights will be given to pupils to attend the school closest to them, no matter whether they apply first or last, as long as they have applied during the admission period. If the parents can’t get their children into the closest school because it is full, they will use the application zone process, which allows parents to apply to any other school within a 30km radius of where they live. If the school has space, pupils will be accepted irrespective of where they live. But when there are more applicants than available spaces, then the preferential right process will be applied. Preferential rights are also given to the siblings of pupils already at the school and to pupils with a parent who works in the feeder zone. Before the department published the feeder zone regulations last month, the default feeder zone was a 5km radius. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.