The seven Limpopo mayors fired by the ANC for their dealings with VBS Mutual Bank could still be deployed in public service after undergoing “robust political induction and rehabilitation”. Seven of the 12 municipalities that invested R2.6-billion of public funds in VBS were the biggest losers when the bank collapsed following what Terry Motau SC, appointed by the South African Reserve Bank to investigate the matter, described as “wide-scale looting and pillaging”. Limpopo Premier Chupu Mathabatha announced the sacking of the mayors in Polokwane on Tuesday, saying the decision followed recommendations by a provincial government-instituted forensic investigation into investments made by municipalities into VBS, which followed Motau’s report. Mathabatha’s announcement suggested the ANC-led provincial government was taking a hard line. He said: “We want to see arrests, successful prosecutions and serious jail terms for all those who have violated the law.” But, on the same day, ANC Limpopo provincial secretary Soviet Lekganyane said the dismissed mayors would continue to serve as ANC councillors. The next day, ANC provincial spokesperson Donald Selamolela appeared to backpedal even further when he said in an interview with the Mail & Guardian that the seven “remain members of the ANC and we will not condemn them to death”. He said they had not been charged and were not facing a party disciplinary hearing. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.