The South African Nuclear Energy Corporation (Necsa) is facing “significant financial distress”, according to its former chief executive and newly appointed board chairperson, Rob Adam. He said the auditor general had issued the company with a disclaimer, because there was “not enough information provided by the company to have a confident assessment of the financial situation”. “[This] is quite a poor position to start from,” Adam said on Wednesday, but he added that his intention was to “fix things”. Energy Minister Jeff Radebe announced Necsa’s new board last week. The minister accused the previous board of governance failings, including financial mismanagement and signing a strategic document with Russian interests in express contravention of the minister’s opinion. But the former chairperson, Kelvin Kemm, board member Pamela Bosman and Necsa chief executive officer, Phumzile Tshelane, who was placed on precautionary suspension, have launched a legal challenge. Necsa has been unable to finalise its financial results for the 2017-2018 year and was granted an extension by Parliament to submit them by February next year. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.