South Africans watched helplessly as former president Jacob Zuma and his cronies allegedly looted state resources, without any apparent consequences, but now there are several moves underway to get back some of the money. These include civil litigation suits by the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) to retrieve money lost by the SABC and money poured into the Giyani Bulk Water Project. Transnet has started proceedings to recover money from former executives and service providers involved in the R54-billion contract to secure 1 046 locomotives. Collectively, the amounts come to several billion rand, which was paid out for irregular contracts, or other corruption and maladministration by state-owned entities and government departments. Action is being taken against both companies and individuals, including Brian Molefe and Anoj Singh, the former chief executive and chief financial officer of Transnet, respectively. Also subject to court action are dismissed Transnet chief executive Siyabonga Gama, Gupta-linked Regiments Capital and Trillian Capital. Transnet has initiated court proceedings to have Regiments, Singh, former group treasurer Phetolo Ramosebudi, former group chief financial officer Garry Pita and Gama pay back a separate inflated advisory fee of R185-million, including value-added tax. Transnet says Regiments was supposed to receive R15-million for financial services and for facilitating credit currency and default swaps with multinational investment bank JP Morgan of the controversial procurement contract for 1 046 locomotives, but instead it had been paid R166-million with the assistance of the executives. In another case, Transnet is suing Molefe, Singh and Regiments for R79.23-million, with interest, on the money paid to Regiments. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.