A delay in Eskom’s battle to claw back the millions of rands it lost to Gupta-linked Trillian could further hurt the ailing power utility, the high court in Pretoria heard this week. On Wednesday, Eskom’s case to set aside decisions that led to almost R600-million being paid to Trillian was postponed until March 2019. This is after the court allowed the consulting firm to file new evidence more than a month after its papers were supposed to be finalised. In an affidavit opposing the application, Eskom’s chief operating officer, Jan Oberholzer, emphasises the importance of a speedy resolution to the matter, saying the parastatal is at pains to reassure international investors that it can recover the money and address its legacy of corruption. “The swift return of the almost R600-million that was unlawfully paid to Trillian would assist in Eskom’s broader efforts to repair its balance sheet and to recoup the losses from almost a decade of mismanagement,” Oberholzer says. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.