KwaZulu-Natal ANC chairperson Sihle Zikalala has ridden out a backlash against him from supporters of former president Jacob Zuma and is likely to emerge as the party’s premier candidate next May. ANC branches across the country are in the process of deciding who will represent the party in the provincial legislatures, the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) and in Parliament next year. The provincial list conferences are expected to be completed by the end of the weekend, after which their lists will be consolidated at a national list conference. Zikalala had led the campaign to elect Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma as ANC president last December, but has since been accused of dumping the Zuma camp in favour of the successful “unity” slate he headed at the KwaZulu-Natal provincial conference in July. Despite threats from his critics in the eThekwini and Moses Mabhida regions that they would choose Nomusa Dube-Ncube, the ANC provincial treasurer, as premier candidate, Zikalala made the top spot on the 80-person list for the provincial legislature at the provincial list conference held in Durban on Wednesday. As such, he is the preferred premier candidate of the ANC in the province and, should the party win, he will replace Willies Mchunu after the election in May. The province’s legislature list and those for the National Assembly and the NCOP will only be made public next week after they are consolidated, but the Mail & Guardian can also confirm that Zikalala’s deputy, Mike Mabuyakhulu, made number two on the province’s legislature list and number one on its list for the NCOP. Mabuyakhulu, one of the provincial co-ordinators of President Cyril Ramaphosa’s successful campaign at Nasrec, made the list despite facing charges of corruption while he was the province’s MEC for economic development for the payment of R28-million for a jazz festival in 2012 that never took place. Dube-Ncube came in at number three for the legislature list, and participants in the conference said that, despite the earlier tensions between the two factions, the province had elected a “balanced” set of candidates. “I think we have done very well,” said one delegate who did not want to be identified because he is not authorised to talk to the media. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.