ANC spokesperson Pule Mabe will know by Wednesday the findings of the panel of national executive committee (NEC) members appointed to investigate charges of sexual harassment laid against him by his personal assistant. Mabe, who stepped down from his post for the duration of the inquiry, which was appointed by the ANC’s top six on Monday, allegedly sexually harassed the 26-year-old woman twice since he employed her. She made the allegations against Mabe, who was appointed as spokesperson after the ANC’s national conference at Nasrec last December, in a 14-page letter that was handed to the ANC’s human resources department at its Luthuli House headquarters in Johannesburg last week. According to acting ANC spokesperson Dakota Legoete, the matter was being investigated by a panel set up by the office of the secretary general at the behest of the party’s top six. The panel, which is chaired by NEC members S’dumo Dlamini and Thoko Didiza, would be expected to produce findings and recommendations by Wednesday. “Both the alleged victim and perpetrator were given an opportunity to make submissions … [and] witnesses are still giving submissions. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.