The Mangosuthu University of Technology (MUT) has been unstable for about 10 years, according to an independent assessor’s report looking into the problems faced by the institution and the state of its governance. The report was commissioned in May by the higher education and training minister, Naledi Pandor, who appointed former Unisa vice-chancellor Professor Barney Pityana to investigate. Pandor released Pityana’s report two weeks ago. It found that governance and management have long been a contentious issue and recommended disbanding the council — the university’s highest decision-making body. Things reached a “crisis point” at MUT when the executive committee of council suspended six members of the executive management, including former vice-chancellor Professor Mashupye Kgaphola in 2016, said the report. “At issue was the plain fact that council appeared to have lost confidence in the vice-chancellor and in the executive management. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.