The Public Investment Corporation (PIC) is “assessing its options” regarding the Independent Media stable after the Government Employees Pension Fund (GEPF) declared an impairment on its investment in the group of more than R1-billion. This follows a default on loan repayments that became due in August, the fund’s principal executive officer, Abel Sithole, revealed at a briefing on its annual results on Wednesday. Impairments also included R4.3-billion raised against a loan to the Lancaster Group, which was used to fund an empowerment stake in embattled retail giant Steinhoff and R374-million in defunct VBS Mutual Bank. The Steinhoff empowerment deal consisted of two transactions, done in 2016 and in 2017, and enabled Lancaster to take up a 2.75% stake in Steinhoff International with a loan of R9.35-billion from the PIC. The second transaction allowed Lancaster to take up an 8.8% stake in Steinhoff Africa Retail, which has since been rebranded as Pepkor. These impairments have predominantly been made on the PIC’s unlisted investment portfolio. The PIC manages assets of behalf of the GEPF, which holds R1.8-trillion in government workers’ pensions. Sithole said the impairments were not write-offs because the GEPF still believed there was some value attached to these assets. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.