There was good news this week when gross domestic product (GDP) figures released by Statistics South Africa for the third quarter showed positive growth, lifting the economy out of a technical recession. But if we have seemingly put the dreaded “r” word behind us, economists were quick to raise the “e” word — Eskom, the albatross, which threatens to be a brake on growth because of load-shedding. StatsSA reported growth of 2.2% in the third quarter, bringing GDP growth for the past year to 1.1%. “We’re reporting a better number into an environment in which load-shedding is a real risk and it does threaten this recovery at the margin,” said Adrian Saville, the chief executive of Cannon Asset Managers. On Wednesday, Parliament’s justice committee experienced a power cut while discussing the Democratic Alliance’s request to speed up the process of removing public protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane from office. Absa economist Miyelani Maluleke said it was not easy to quantify the effects of power cuts because they not only affected economic activity, but private sector confidence as well. “We have seen from StatsSA data that private sector investment declined in each of the first three quarters of 2018. If not resolved quickly, the ongoing electricity problems raise the risk that the growth rebound that we saw in the third-quarter will be short-lived,” he said. Nedbank chief economist Dennis Dykes said there was no doubt that load-shedding negatively affected industries and business sentiment, but luckily the power cuts started fairly late in the fourth quarter when production was beginning to slow down because of the holiday season. He said he hoped Eskom would use the power cuts strategically to rebuild its coal supplies during the December period.  “If we hit next year and it’s a continuation of the same thing, then the country is in some trouble because we can’t go into another few months of load-shedding like we saw in 2014-2015 and, of course, in 2008. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.