“I was just trying to create something that sounded like hip-hop, but on a house tempo” is how DJ Lag tried to articulate his sound on our first meeting at his mother’s house in Clermont four years ago. Dusk was falling on the hills of the township, which is closer to Pinetown than Durban, but the sun was clearly rising for DJ Lag. In the Chris Saunders photograph that has come to be the living document of that meeting (published in Red Bulletin in 2014), Lag’s head is tilted, his eyes not quite looking at the camera, as if he is scanning the far-away lands that would soon become his stomping ground. In 2016, the same photograph would become the cover of DJ Lag’s first official international release for British label Goon Club All stars, run by DJ and producer Moleskin. Simply titled DJ Lag, the album was a showcase of the innovative beat structures and the hard-driving pace that the more hardcore DJs were pushing in Durban’s underground clubs. Songs like 16th Step showcased interlocking, rhythms and Ice Drop was a properly mixed-down version of that trademark distorted drum sound, whose engineering only seemed to enhance its thump and deepen its crests rather than neuter them. Although this music may have been novel in some corners of the world and, indeed, in parts of South Africa, it was how Durban youth had been “banging” for a good number of years. For Lag, his elders, so to speak, were the likes of Naked Boyz, who produced the song Ithoyizi, which was featured on a DJ Cndo compilation in about “2010 or 2011”. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.