Two officials in the Limpopo municipalities that deposited millions of rands of public funds in the now-defunct VBS Mutual Bank asked for expensive gifts and a share in the loot grabbed during the bank heist. This is alleged in court documents answering former ANC Limpopo treasurer Danny Msiza’s application to review the Reserve Bank report on VBS by Terry Motau, SC. Although the report is in the public domain, the addenda to it were not previously made public because they contain personal information. Msiza’s application to review the report has now exposed that information. This week the ANC fired seven mayors from the municipalities that deposited money in VBS. Motau alleged that Msiza, who resigned this week, is a director, together with his wife, in a company that was paid R1.5‑million under questionable circumstances, and a R9.5-million bond granted to Msiza’s company was serviced in part by Kabelo Matsepe’s company. Matsepe is one of the people listed in the Motau report as having received “gratuitous” payments from VBS. Motau attached WhatsApp messages between Matsepe and Msiza, in which they discuss municipalities’ investments and payments. Matsepe denied any wrongdoing or that he received payments in corrupt transactions. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.