It’s official.  SAFCOIN, an exclusively African focused crypto-currency, officially launched on December 13 2018. Local crypto enthusiasts recently were able to be part of the SAFCOIN ICO (Initial Coin Offering) which ended on October 31 2018 — and now those who missed out on the ICO, can also get involved — as SAFCOIN is open for trade. “What an exciting year it has been for us,” says Neil Ferreira, co-founder and chief executive of founding company FHM (PTY) Ltd.  “We are proud to be part of the blockchain and crypto revolution. We are excited to bring the SAFCOIN blockchain, mobile app and exchange to the people of South Africa.” During the ICO there were some who doubted the validity of SAFCOIN, as many have fallen prey to ICO scams, which makes it difficult for startups to successfully enter the market.
But despite some obstacles, the SAFCOIN team is thrilled to have proved to the public that they are here to stay, and determined to make a positive difference in the lives of many. SAFCOIN aims to tap into the ways that crypto-currency can positively impact Africa.  “We are not here to overthrow the existing financial system, but rather to tap into the numerous benefits of crypto for Africa by developing use case technology for every individual to benefit from the positives of crypto-currency, while maintaining the highest levels of business ethics and standards,” says Ferreira. The launch of the SAFCOIN crypto, wallet and exchange will lay the foundation for many innovative developments in the future with the rollout to Africa, e-commerce integration and other developments already well under way. Although crypto is currently unregulated in South Africa, SAFCOIN has decided to self-regulate the exchange by adopting KYC (Know Your Customer) protocol and FICA (Financial Intelligence Centre) compliance to ensure friendly use. SAFCOIN opened its first South African call centre on the Garden Route in the Western Cape recently, offering assistance and support to customers on using the various SAFCOIN platforms in English, isiZulu, isiXhosa and Afrikaans, with plans to add more official languages and centres in the near future. For more information and to buy your SAFCOINs, visit www.safcoin.co.za The SAFCOIN mobile wallet app and exchange can be downloaded on Google Play Store or on the Apple AppStore.  Visit the SAFCOIN website for download information. Safcoin is a registered member of the Blockchain Association of South Africa.