An increase in customs tariffs might be what South Africa needs to ward off an influx of foreign imports that are threatening the survival of local industries, says ANC national executive committee member Senzo Mchunu. In an interview with the Mail & Guardian, Mchunu raised concerns about what he termed South Africa’s lazy approach to protecting any of its local industries as the country’s economy continues to shed thousands of jobs. Until recently, the ANC had ignored repeated calls to increase tariffs to save jobs in a number of industries including steel and clothing. These have come from its alliance partners, the labour federation Cosatu and the South African Communist Party, as well as trade unions, such as the National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa. But in what appeared to be a change of heart, Mchunu, who is the ANC’s organising and campaign chairperson, said South Africa could learn a lesson from United States President Donald Trump’s approach to protecting local production. “Trump may sound mad but he is hitting the correct note to say, if you don’t protect your industries, they will fall because they will be taken over by imports and so on,” Mchunu said. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.