A three-way spat between the Market Theatre Foundation chief executive, the chairperson of its board and disgruntled workers threatens to plunge the organisation ever deeper into scandal. The board chairperson, Kwanele Gumbi, has hit out at playwright and blogger Mike van Graan, accusing him of helping “his friend” chief executive Ismail Mahomed “get an edge over the complaints we have against him” in a recent blog. Speaking to the Mail & Guardian, Gumbi, who is accused of maladministration, described the post as a way of increasing the pressure on him “until something gives”. Among the main allegations against him are his attempt to pay members of the board Christmas bonuses amounting to R850 000 and to hike his meeting fees from R1 000 to R10 000 a meeting. In turn, Gumbi has accused Mahomed of nepotism and unprocedural behaviour for alleged attempts to secure full-time employment and a 13th cheque for Yusrah Bardien, a former contract employee, who was employed as an audience engagement strategist. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.