The top management of the Mangosuthu University of Technology (MUT) were complicit in the abuse of the institution by the former vice-chancellor for his personal gain, which included buying luxury vehicles, multimillion-rand refurbishments to his home and paying for his private bodyguards. These were the findings of a forensic report following allegations of mismanagement at the university. Former Unisa vice-chancellor Professor Barney Pityana, who was appointed by the higher education minister, Naledi Pandor, as an independent assessor, has also concluded his own investigation and will hand his assessment to Pandor. His report focused on the state of governance at the university and the source and nature of problems facing the institution, including those relating to financial mismanagement, supply chain management and human resources. Six senior executives, who included former vice-chancellor Professor Ratale Kgaphola, the chief financial officer, an executive director, the operations manager, the human resources manager and the dean of students, were suspended in 2016 following allegations of financial mismanagement, which led to the MUT instituting a forensic investigation. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.