The negative publicity of being associated with the controversial Gupta family and former president Jacob Zuma is what sounded the death knell for the daily newspaper AfroVoice. United Democratic Movement leader Bantu Holomisa has been gagged from badmouthing the Lebashe Investment Group and its top officials, including non-executive director and former finance deputy minister Jabu Moleketi. Finance Minister Nhlanhla Nene is opposing legal action to suspend Dan Matjila, the embattled CEO of the Public Investment Corporation, pitting him directly against his deputy, Mondli Gungubele. Heavily indebted Sibanye-Stillwater, which has been dogged by numerous fatalities at its mines and a floundering share price, has secured $500-million from Wheaton Precious Metals International that will slash the company’s debt by more than a quarter. The VBS Mutual Bank saga took another twist on Monday when it emerged that the newspaper business of staunch Jacob Zuma supporter Mzwanele Manyi, which he bought from the Gupta family, banked with the lender that failed due to alleged fraud by its directors. Cash-strapped Eskom may pay as much as R100-million a month in a desperate bid to truck coal stockpiles from Limpopo to supply two power stations in Mpumalanga, 400kms away. United Democratic Movement leader claims billions are lost through dodgy deals at the government pension body — but a judge yesterday silenced him “because they don’t want us to talk about it”, Holomisa said. Current and former heads of state of 11 countries are expected to attend the Nelson Mandala lecture kicking off centenary celebrations. The National Prosecuting Authority has ordered police to probe another alleged incident involving the media mogul. Mzwanele Manyi blames his newspaper’s financial woes on negative publicity surrounding former president Jacob Zuma and the Gupta family. For 27 years, Sam Tshabalala worked hard to give his son the best he could. Sam paid for expensive schools and was always there for the child.
But last month, his wife dropped a bombshell. Thousands of workers will walk off the job on Tuesday at Amazon warehouses in Germany to demand better working conditions, joining colleagues in Spain and Poland in taking action that coincides with a major sales promotion. (Reuters) Republicans swiftly condemned Donald Trump’s performance at today’s joint press conference with Russia’s Vladimir Putin in Helsinki, in which the US president refused to back repeated findings by US intelligence agencies that Russia attacked the US 2016 election.Susan Collins, the senator from Maine, called Trump’s position “untenable and at odds with the forceful response this moment demands.” South Carolina senator Lindsay Graham said Trump’s failure to “firmly hold Russia accountable for 2016 meddling” will “be seen by Russia as a sign of weakness and create far more problems than it solves.” A wide array of Republicans with access to FBI intelligence vocally sided with American institutions over Trump. (Quartz) The streaming media giant missed its subscriber addition projections for the first time in five quarters, leading shares to tumble more than 14 percent.The company reported second-quarter earnings after the market closed on Monday. In addition to a slight miss on revenue compared to estimates, Netflix posted a huge miss on subscriber additions. (CNBC)