A 31-year-old community service nurse is forced to perform specialist duties inside a neonatal intensive care unit without supervision. Yesterday, she joined a group of frustrated health workers who have been working as community service nurses for close to three years instead of one year. Arthur Mafokate remains defiant in the face of criticism against his participation at the 100 Men March.
Mafokate stands accused of assaulting his ex-girlfriend and his case is still being heard. Individuals, burial societies, stokvels and savings clubs are to receive their money from the government after VBS Mutual Bank was placed under curatorship. READ MORE: VBS’s future in doubt Daily Sun The ANC in KZN is ready for the public hearings into land expropriation without compensation which will take place next week. READ MORE: ANC KZN kicks off provincial land summit Score free Madiba fest tickets Global superstar Beyonce is heading to Mzansi for a free concert, scheduled for December 2 at the FNB Stadium. But music fans will have to sweat to get their hands on free tickets. READ MORE: Femi Kuti, Beyonce headed to SA for Mandela festival Taxman is after Teko Sars has confirmed that former Bafana Bafana player Teko Modise is among 10 South Africans convicted for failing to submit outstanding tax returns. All 10 have been fined and now have criminal records. McKinsey, the global consultancy that had to refund Eskom almost R1-billion in fees, will continue to pursue state-sector work in SA using the same controversial model that landed it in hot water. The Reserve Bank painted a grim picture on Monday that suggests as much as 75% of VBS Mutual Bank’s assets may have been stolen by its executives and directors. Former Denel chairman Daniel Mantsha, who left the arms manufacturer in a huff shortly after President Ramaphosa was elected president, has been appointed as Jacob Zuma’s new attorney. A woman accused of being eThekwini mayor Zandile Gumede’s “domestic worker” with an alleged salary of R50 000 a month since 2016 has slammed the allegations as a vicious political smear campaign. Gauteng education MEC Panyaza Lesufi’s campaign to become ANC’s deputy chairperson in the province has secured a major boost after the Sedibeng region threw its weight behind him. READ MORE: Battle on for top posts in Gauteng ANC The Citizen There may be an end in sight for the ongoing wage talks at state power utility Eskom. As negotiations continue today, trade union Solidarity said it was seriously considering taking the employer’s offer of a 7% wage hike. The Tshwane Metro Police Department was shocked to learn of the arrest of one of their sergeants who was allegedly involved in the bombing of two cash-in-transit vehicles during the recent Boksburg heist. Limpopo Premier Stan Mathabatha’s office has said “good riddance” to a provincial municipal manager who was forced to resign after he allegedly increased his annual salary by 10% without the approval of the municipal council. May met with her new Cabinet after the “Brexodus.” Beset by a revolt over her “soft” Brexit plans—in the form of a slew of high-profile resignations—May chose new Cabinet members overnight. She could still face a leadership challenge, and the UK may well have to brace for yet another general election. (BBC) READ MORE: Boris jumps ship as unstable May-led UK government lurches Washington DC Circuit Court of Appeals judge Brett Kavanaugh has had a role in some of America’s most partisan legal battles. As a young attorney in prosecutor Kenneth Starr’s office, Kavanaugh was the lead author of the salacious Starr Report calling for president Bill Clinton’s impeachment, and also represented George W. Bush in the 2000 Florida vote recount. (Quartz) Judge Dana Sabraw, who earlier ordered the US government to reconnect children under the age of five with their families by Tuesday, allowed an extension. An attorney representing the government told the judge that only 54 kids of 102 were back with parents or guardians. (NBC News)