Cosatu is consulting with its affiliates regarding attempts to remove PIC boss Dan Matjila, as the fight for control of the crucial funding institution intensifies among political elites. While the Ivory Park Taxi Association was still reeling from shock after the massacre of 11 of its members in a bloody ambush, Parliament conceded that violence in the industry had reached crisis level. The #NotInMyName movement has expressed its unhappiness with what it described as sluggish investigation into the death of Taxify cab driver Siyabonga Ngcobo. The election of new ANC leadership in two important provinces at the weekend was a marked boost for President Cyril Ramaphosa, tightening his grip on the party, which has been highly contested by opponents from the camp of former president Jacob Zuma. The curator of VBS Mutual Bank will head back to court on Tuesday to apply for the sequestration of Robert Madzonga, the CEO of the bank’s largest shareholder, Vele Investments, as part of ongoing efforts to recover money the curator believes was stolen from the bank by its executives and shareholders. The NPA has received new evidence against former president Jacob Zuma and French arms company Thales. ANC SG Ace Magashule has hailed the successful conferences of Gauteng and KZN as a huge step forward to achieving unity within the party The winter initiation season has come to an end, and in the Eastern Cape alone so have the lives of 19 young women There is no unity in the KZN ANC and the election of a “united” provincial executive committee is a false deal mean to appease President Ramaphosa’s opponents to stop them from boycotting the party in the 2019 elections, a political analyst says. From a ruling party rally in the east to opposition door-to-door canvassing in the northwest, Zimbabweans have been experiencing the novelty of a relatively free and peaceful election campaign. Business Unity South Africa said yesterday that it was concerned about imminent job losses in the domestic steel and aluminium industry, if the import duties imposed by the United States government go ahead. The brutal assault and killing of Xolisile Ndzongana, allegedly by a group of white men in Middleburg, Mpumalanga, has stoked fresh racial tensions in the area. The ANC Women’s League has once again bemoaned the low number of women who are elected into leadership positions in the party following the conclusion of two provincial conferences. Mpumalanga ANC chairman candidate Peter Nyoni says his province is done with “dictatorship” where a certain individual chooses who the next leader will be. A new survey suggests opposition Zimbabwean leader Nelson Chamisa is closing in on the ruling Zanu-PF’s President Emmerson Mnangagwa. (The Conversation) President Trump threatened Iran in capital letters on Twitter after the country’s president, Hassan Rouhani, warned of a confrontation that would be the “mother of all wars.” (The New York Times) French President Emmanuel Macron has ordered a staff shake-up after a video emerged showing his now sacked aide beating up a protester, officials say. (BBC)