Shocking, widespread corruption, fraud, theft and mismanagement of hundreds of millions of rands at the Municipal Councillors’ Pension Fund has been referred to the Hawks by its curators. The Obama Foundation on Saturday began its five-day gathering in Jo’burg of 200 emerging leaders from 44 countries across Africa. Two decades latter, France are once again the world champions. But it wasn’t that straight forward, as Croatia put up a good fight in an entertaining goal-fest. President Cyril Ramaphosa says the ‘new dawn’ is a lot further away than people might think as he prioritises ANC unity Young scientists, doctors may have to teach in schools, in community service. SA has raised its concern with the US government about possible duties on vehicles and vehicle component imports, pointing out that their imposition on South African exports would significantly erode the benefit the country is meant to enjoy under the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act (Agoa) The battle for the soul of the DA has no end in sight as the opposition party shelved the key debate on the powers of provincial leaders at the weekend. The High Court in Pretoria will rule on Monday morning on an urgent court application to gag UDM leader Bantu Holomisa from alleging that a major BEE investment firm and prominent business figures may be involved in Public Investment Corporation corruption. Daily Sun For two long days and nights the family waited and prayed for good news about their missing girl.
Then their sleepless wait came to an end. British lawmakers will debate the government’s proposed legislation on post-Brexit customs arrangements and trade on July 16 and 17, creating another potential flashpoint between Prime Minister Theresa May and pro-European Union lawmakers. The debates will be a chance for lawmakers in May’s Conservative Party to make the case for Britain to remain in a customs union with the EU - something May has ruled out despite being unable to find an alternative that is acceptable to her cabinet and Brussels. (Reuters) At a news conference on Friday, Donald Trump said he gave a suggestion to British Prime Minister Theresa May that she found “too brutal.” May finally revealed what that piece of advice was during an interview with the BBC on Sunday. “He told me I should sue the EU.” May then repeated the gist of the message: “Sue the EU, not go into negotiations with them, sue them.” May said she was ignoring the U.S. president’s advice. “Actually we’re going into negotiations with them,” she said. (Slate) Cuba has published a summary of a new constitution likely to be approved by the national assembly later this week, which will recognize a right to own private property. Private property was banned after Fidel Castro and his Communist Party seized power in 1959, but sales have been permitted since 2011. The proposed new constitution would freely recognise all private property, as well as the free market, while maintaining a strong role for the government, state media say. (Quartz) Haiti’s Prime Minister Jack Guy Lafontant resigned Saturday after days of riots sparked by a plan to raise prices on fuel. Haitian President President Jovenel Moïse said on Twitter that he had accepted Lafontant’s resignation as well as members of his cabinet. Moïse said he would work to choose a new prime minister. Lafontant, a doctor who only took up the job of prime minister in early 2017, resigned shortly before a no-confidence vote was to be called in Haiti’s parliament, which could have led to his removal from office. (NPR)