First and foremost, there are “black” people whose social mobility into the elite and middle classes have not been contingent on the form of BEE being discussed. Under the guise of transformation, the state has attempted to change the face of capital accumulation in the post-apartheid era, and there have long been questions about whether black economic empowerment (BEE) policies have been successful in changing wealth distribution. But what is certain is that the government has played an active role in creating a class of capitalists closely aligned to the state through these policies. This has seen an accumulation of wealth among current members of government with access to business, former politicians and others who have formed part of the state’s patronage network. The end of apartheid saw the emergence of a “black” elite whose accumulation was predicated on their alignment with “white” business entities, whose accumulation of wealth rested on finance, mining and related capital-intensive industries, the mineral energy complex. Business elites aggressively sought to absorb emerging “black” capitalists as an insurance against the possibility of nationalisation and other more radical reforms that threatened their interests. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.