In your local headlines today: Former president Robert Mugabe’s endorsement of Nelson Chamisa on the eve of a tense Zimbabwean election could swing a significant portion of the rural vote to the Movement for Democratic Change Alliance and see the emergence of independent MPS. The company that slapped Independent Media with a cease and desist letter fore reporting on a dodgy deal — now the subject of a Hawks investigation — has agreed to pay back R137-million to a councillor’s pension fund. Public enterprises director-general Richard Seleke, who was implicated in the tranche of leaked Gupta emails, is leaving his position at the department this week after reaching a settlement with the Presidency. Former Zimbabwean president Robert Mugabe has snubbed his own Zanu-PF party, saying he will back any one of the opposition parties in today’s elections. For the past three years Naspers has avoided revealing the substantial level of opposition to its controversial remuneration policy by lumping its two classes of shares together when disclosing voting details, in what seems like contravention of JSE rules. As women across the country prepare for #TheTotalShutdown march on Wednesday against gender-based violence, the police will be pondering what led to the alleged shooting of a woman by a VIP bodyguard. Award-winning songstress Zahara was ridiculed on social media on Saturday night after she posted that she had been attacked by beggars earlier in the week. Persistent problems with the department of health’s application portal and general unhappiness with the treatment being meted out to them is forcing many doctors to look at plying their trade outside South Africa’s borders. In your global headlines today: Italy’s far-right interior minister Matteo Salvini dismissed the European Union’s latest migration plan as a “charity handout”, after Brussels proposed €6 000 (£5 346) payments to member states for every migrant hosted at a secure centre on their soil.
(The Guardian) Cambodia’s ruling party has won Sunday’s general election, the chief government spokesman said, a widely expected outcome in an election slammed by rights groups as illegitimate, and which ensures that long-ruling Prime Minister Hun Sen will serve another five year-term. Although 20 parties contested the election, the only one with the popularity and organisation to mount a real challenge, the Cambodian National Rescue Party, was dissolved last year by the Supreme Court in a ruling generally seen as political in nature. (The Chicago Tribune) An Israeli Palestinian lawmaker resigned from parliament on Saturday in protest over a controversial new law that declares Israel the nation state of the Jewish people. Zouheir Bahloul, of the opposition and centre-left Zionist Union Party, said he could not face telling his grandson that he remained part of the same chamber which passed the law. (The New Arab) The deadly Northern California Carr Fire that has forced tens of thousands of people to flee their homes slowed down Sunday after days of explosive growth, giving officials hope even as they announced the discovery of a sixth fatality. Officials said there were more than 150 engines on the way from out of state to help. (CBS News) Neymar has admitted he exaggerated some of his reactions after being fouled during the World Cup in Russia. The Brazilian also said in a video published Sunday by one of his sponsors that he is now a changed man after all the criticism he received at home and abroad. (The Chicago Tribune)