According to eNCA, the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) has decided to proceed with the Mkhari assault charges in the “interest of justice”. On Monday morning, eNCA reported that media personality and owner Given Mkhari had been arrested for assault. The MSG Afrika Group CEO and founder and his wife, Ipeleng Mkhari, were both expected to appear in court today. According to reports, Mkhari allegedly assaulted Ipeleng who laid assault charges against him. In turn, Mkhari laid a counter charge against her.
However, according to Power FM which is owned by MSG Afrika Group, the couple have since withdrawn the assault charges. In an interview with journalist Erin Bates, NPA spokesperson Phindi Louw explained that it is the prerogative of the prosecutor on whether or not it will withdraw charges. “Even when a complainant is willing to withdraw charges, but the prosecutor is convinced that it is in the interest of justice for the case to proceed, the case will proceed,” Louw said. According to Louw, the normal procedure would have the police file a withdrawal statement then bring the docket to the NPA to decide whether or not the case will continue. As the NPA, Louw said, “We have a duty to protect citizens”. The radio station confirmed that the ‘unfortunate incident’ between Mkhari and his wife occurred on Saturday night. The family will be resolving the matter at home, Power FM reported. In a statement released on Monday morning, Ipeleng and Given Mkhari confirmed that an incident had occurred in their home. Read the full statement below: We confirm that an unfortunate incident happened between us in our home on Saturday, 14 July 2018. We both individually reported the matter to the police. We are now withdrawing each case to resolve the matter in the privacy of our home. Issued by Ipeleng and Given Mkhari [BREAKING NEWS] Media personality and owner, Given Mkhari, has been arrested for assault. Mkhari is due to appear in the Randburg Magistrate’s court today. Mkhari allegedly assaulted his wife. Details on #eNCAnow with @XoliMngambi. Courtesy #DStv403 pic.twitter.com/v82JvZLZDo This is a developing story and will be updated as more details emerge.