Gauteng ANC chairman David Makhura has explained the election of former health MEC Qedani Mahlangu and chief whip Brian Hlongwa to the PEC. Makhura also says that they will engage with national government to scrap e-tolls. A taxi boss from Alexandra, Randburg, Midrand and Sandton Taxi Association was shot dead in his car yesterday. The incident happened in Alex. Angry staff disrupted service delivery at a major hospital. Heaps of rubbish and medical waste were scattered in the passages and in some wards of the hospital, including in casualty wards at the Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital. Newly elected ANC Gauteng chairman David Makhura is unfazed by the provincial executive committee (PEC) being loaded with leaders who differ with him politically. Gender activists have slammed the NPA’s decision not to prosecute ANC MP and convicted woman beater Mduduzi Manana. Parktown Boys teachers probed Disciplinary action against two Parktown Boys High School teachers accused of racism and assault is under way. Santaco believes government should shoulder some of the blame for the escalation of taxi violence across the country, citing route allocation as the main cause of conflict. READ MORE: Taxi violence: Santaco decries lack of justice The City of Tshwane is making headway in repairing two giant sinkholes, in Centurion and Laudium, with most major repairs expected to be completed by the end of August. The Public Servant Association has welcomed the resignation of the director-general of home affairs, Mkuseli Apleni, who was “not fit” and whose legacy will always be tainted. State-owned electricity company Eskom released its annual financial results on Monday, revealing that it remained in deep trouble, with falling sales, a declining ability to meet debt obligations and concerns over its going concern status. The split at board level at the Public Investment Corporation over the handling of an investigation into embattled CEO Dan Matjila seems to be widening, with non executive director Claudia Manning resigning at the weekend Newly-elected ANC KZN chairman Sihle Zikalala made an about-turn on his support for Jacob Zuma, now saying it is wrong to support the former president in court, where he is facing graft charges. An 82-year-old Ekurhuleni man who died in 2011 “rang up” a debt of R4 466 in unpaid vehicle discs as he lay in his grave. The man was among scores of deceased people whose identities were allegedly stolen by metro police department clerks to register them as owners of vehicles which owned the metro thousands of rand in unpaid car licence discs. Woolworths has started searching customers and has increased the number of plain clothes security guards in all its KZN stores, following a string of bomb scares at its branches. The department of home affairs’ campaign to make its branches more efficient is off to a slow start. North Korea has started dismantling a missile-engine test site, as President Trump said the North’s leader, Kim Jong-un, promised he would during their historic summit meeting. (New York Times) Most members of the Thai youth football team rescued from a flooded cave will have their heads shaved and don robes to be ordained as novices in a Buddhist ceremony on Tuesday. (BBC)