Changes to the Constitution to allow for the expropriation of land without compensation received overwhelming support on the first day of hearings by Parliament’s joint constitutional review committee in northern KwaZulu-Natal on Wednesday. So did the Ingonyama Trust, which gives King Goodwill Zwelithini control of almost three million hectares of rural land. Residents of rural areas around Vryheid told the hearing that although they wanted section 25 of the Constitution changed, land under traditional control should not be affected. The vast majority of the several hundred people who turned out for the hearing backed expropriation without compensation, with only a few — mainly white farmers and representatives of farming organisations — opposing it. A large crowd of people was forced to wait outside the gate until after a break in proceedings because the number who had arrived with the intention of speaking was far higher than the capacity of the town’s Cecil Emmett Hall. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.