ANC Youth League national executive committee member Victoria de Beer is hoping to make history by becoming its first woman president when the young lions convene their elective conference in September. In an interview with the Mail & Guardian this week, De Beer took a swipe at ANC leaders who, she said, interfere in the affairs of the league and use its leaders as pawns in their factional battles. She called on the youth wing to find its voice and speak up against being used by older members in its mother body. The 31-year-old, who serves as the member of the mayoral committee for finance in the Free State’s Fezile Dabi district municipality, wants to restore the confidence of young people in the troubled party ahead of the 2019 general elections. De Beer said the youth league had failed young South Africans by allowing itself to be used for factional agendas that didn’t serve its constituency. “We need to move away from the ANC’s factions and we must also, as young people, stop being used by old people [in the ANC] with money,” she said “We need to stand up and say it can’t be that those with the most money are the ones who will lead, and forget about society. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.