Police have been warned against the tendency to poorly handle cases of abuse against women and children. Minister Bheki Cele made the call when he joined hundreds who put their best feet forward during the #100MenMarch through Pretoria yesterday. The new lawyer to former president Jacob Zuma is no stranger to controversy, following revelations that he was once disbarred and is still being probed by the Hawks for state capture allegations. A charter plane crashed into a factory after take-off yesterday, leaving one person dead and 19 injured. President Ramaphosa’s efforts to sort out the leadership crisis and restore the credibility of the NPA have been dealt a serious blow. READ MORE: SCA overturns ruling that struck Jiba, Mrwebi off roll of advocates In a policy about-face, state-owned carrier SAA says it will immediately begin seeking a buyer to acquire a stake in the airline as it seeks to cut losses. READ MORE: SAA vows to seek equity partner immediately amid funding crunch Council: 75% of SA’s gold mines unprofitable Three-quarters of SA’s gold mines are unprofitable or barely making money, says the Minerals Council SA as the sector enters wage talks that some participants hope will reflect the realities bedevilling the sector. Sowetan The sister of a 14-year-old girl who was killed and her body dumped in a storm water pipe regrets not being there the night the teenager vanished. Social Development Minister Susan Shabangu has accused outgoing grant distributor, Cash Paymaster Services of misinforming Sassa beneficiaries in a desperate effort to hang onto distributing social grants. Arthur Mafokate has been fired from the Southern African Music Rights Organisation after the music rights group finally heeded the call to boot the kwaito king from its board. South Africa has had its own “miracle rescue” – almost 27 years ago, 571 people were brought safely to shore from the sinking cruise liner Oceanos, in what has been described as the greatest maritime rescue in modern history. READ MORE: Misadventure: How a Thai football team became trapped in a cave Sars bares teeth, names defaulters With a target of R1.345-trillion to reach in this financial year, Sars is forging ahead with its naming and shaming campaign of people convicted for failure to submit tax returns. Solomon Mahlangu’s legacy lives on. The NYDA unveiled a tombstone for Mahlangu in Mamelodi, Tshwane. When Nolufefe Jojo’s son told her he didn’t want to be a drug addict anymore, she knew she would have to take drastic action. Jojo decided to chain him to a 48kg gas cylinder. Britain plans to fine Facebook over data protection breaches. Information commissioner Elizabeth Denham said she’ll fine the company £500,000 ($663,850)—paltry, but the maximum amount allowed—following an investigation into the Cambridge Analytica scandal. Her office also warned political parties to audit their data protection practices. (Reuters) A tense NATO summit begins. European Council president Donald Tusk has warned Donald Trump to “appreciate your allies” in Europe after Trump hinted he would play agitator (paywall) at the meeting, which comes just days before he meets with Russia’s Vladimir Putin. (BBC) Badly wounded and yet limping along, May seems condemned to govern in interesting times. (The Conversation)