Two activists have been murdered at Mpembeni near Richards Bay on the KwaZulu-Natal North Coast in a spate of apparent assassinations, which residents say are linked to tensions over their land. Geshege Nkwanyana and Ntuthuko Dladla were shot dead while returning to the area — about 4km from eSikhawini township — from work on Tuesday and Friday last week. Nkwanyana, the chairperson of the local youth structure, and Dladla, a firefighter who was involved in the local small business forum, had been active in a campaign last year to prevent residents being moved to make way for a prospecting operation. Residents are not sure whether the killings are related to this failed attempt to move them. Another possibility is that the killings are linked to the ongoing clashes at Richards Bay Minerals (RBM), whose mine is close to Mpembeni, also known as KwaDube. Nkwanyana, an electrical subcontractor for RBM, was singled out by the killers from a group of colleagues he was travelling with and shot dead. Dladla, who worked for the uMhlathuze municipality, was shot in his car while driving home in the early hours of Thursday morning. “We are scared for our lives,” a local tribal council member said on Tuesday night. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.