A GIANT TREE HAS FALLEN: TRIBUTES TO ALI AL’AMIN MAZRUI, edited by Seifudein Adem, Jideofor Adibe, Abdul Karim Bangura and Abdul Samed Bemath (African Perspectives Publishing)  A Giant Tree Has Fallen is a festschrift in honour of scholar and activist Ali Mazrui, the Kenyan-born academic whose work was to have a lasting effect on Africa’s scholarship. The book combines essays on and by Mazrui as well as tributes from admirers, critics, family members, academics, heads of states and journalists. An early essay by Mazrui sketches the unfolding of his life, detailing how his experiences growing up in Mombasa and his father’s social standing directed his outlook and early professional choices. “For centuries, Mombasa as seaport had experienced the winds and smells of other civilisations — initially from Africa, Arabia and Asia, and later from the West. My politics were therefore partly internationalised from the outset; so were my cultural experiences. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.