Crucial elective meetings in three ANC provinces hold the key not only to the parliamentary list process ahead of next year’s elections, but also to the party’s 2022 elective conference. ANC president Cyril Ramaphosa’s position is set to be strengthened by being endorsed by the new party leadership in Gauteng, Mpumalanga and KwaZulu-Natal. But his deputy, David Mabuza, may face a backlash from the supporters of Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma’s failed presidential bid. ANC insiders told the Mail & Guardian this week that some provinces are not keen to support Mabuza during the list process (to select party members to serve in Parliament after next year’s elections) later this year, because he “betrayed’’ the Dlamini-Zuma camp during the ANC’s national conference at Nasrec in December. Prior to that conference, Mabuza was part of a group known as the premier league — made up of leaders from Mpumalanga, the Free State and North West — that backed Dlamini-Zuma for ANC president. Mabuza’s 11th-hour decision to back Ramaphosa angered many in her camp, who are now saying they want to punish the former Mpumalanga premier by not supporting his nomination as an ANC representative in Parliament. “I know our forces across the country are angry. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.