How does one present a show that is expansive and yet retains coherence and intimacy? How does one curate a group show that affords each individual artist a platform that enables each artist their most authentic artistic expression? How can group shows provide space for the works to converse with each other? And how do you not fall into the trappings of lazy labelling through the stratification of artists by gender, race or geography, thereby failing to capture the depth of the work and what it seeks to communicate? These questions are precursors to any group show. In its own take, Stevenson Gallery is currently exhibiting Both, and, a show that opened at both gallery locations in Cape Town and Johannesburg, and will remain open until August 22 and 24 in each city respectively. Both, and presents the work of over 50 artists represented by the gallery over a 15-year period: a montage, as it relates to the putting together of seemingly unrelated works and subjects. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.