Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) leader Julius Malema says party members hoping for a seat in Parliament will have to adhere to strict conditions to earn their spot after the 2019 national elections. The party has set stringent guidelines for those who make it onto its list of candidates for Parliament, which requires each member to meet set targets in the 2019 national elections before their seat can be secured. Speaking to the Mail & Guardian ahead of the party’s five-year anniversary celebration in the Eastern Cape on Saturday, Malema said the tight system was being implemented to ensure that those who represented the party in Parliament were committed to the EFF’s growth. “All individuals are going to be given targets and you need to demonstrate that you have achieved that, because we are not going to have some people working hard for others to go to Parliament,” Malema said. He said party members who did not attend meetings, or actively campaign for the party and failed to do constituency work would fall foul of the conditions and risk being removed. “You have to earn it for yourself and demonstrate at the end of elections that the assignment given to me I fulfilled, and [I] am deserving to sit in Parliament.” Malema said the stricter guidelines mean candidates must sign a withdrawal letter that will allow the party to remove them from the list should it be found they have under-delivered on their allocated targets. The EFF will celebrate its fifth anniversary at the Sisa Dukashe Stadium in Mdantsane, near East London, and expects no less than 10 000 people to arrive. The party’s strongholds have been Gauteng, Limpopo and North West but Malema said the EFF’s internal polls were showing changes in its national footprint that placed the Eastern Cape as its third-largest province after Gauteng and Limpopo. This, Malema said, proved the EFF was not limited to specific provinces or ethnic groups. Ipsos polled the EFF at 7% support in next year’s elections, a minimal increase from its 6.35% in 2014. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.