The state has lodged an 87-page court bid to go after the personal assets of the executives accused of looting VBS Mutual Bank of more than R1.5-billion in a fraud scheme of epic proportions. READ MORE: VBS’s future in doubt The rooting out of the “cartel conduct” among soccer agents uncovered by the Competition Commission will lead to players and coaches getting better deals in their transfers. Legal advocacy group Section27 has torn into Judge Gerrit Muller’s judgment in the Michael Komape case, arguing that he did not apply the principles by which he was bound. READ MORE: Court dismisses damages claim by Komape family Afro Voice staff on optional paid leave Confusion seems to best describe the situation Afro Voice newspaper finds itself in. It has now emerged that boss, Mzwanele Manyi has put his employees on “paid discretionary leave”. President Ramaphosa has asked for time to decide whether he continues to fight his predecessor Jacob Zuma’s court battle to protect former prosecutions head Nomgcobo Jiba from a court-ordered inquiry into her fitness to hold office. READ MORE: Jiba to remain on leave until Abrahams gives the go ahead for her return Firm that felled Steinhoff accused of duplicity Viceroy, which burst onto the public scene after its report in December flagged irregularities at disgraced retailer Steinhoff International, plagiarised its way to influence. As the country’s strike season intensifies, footwear workers became the latest sector on Wednesday to down tools over wage offers.
According to the South African Clothing and Textile Workers’ Union (Sactwu), 10 000 workers took part in the strike on its first day. MultiChoice is fighting tooth and nail to remain relevant amid tough competition from online streaming services. The pay-TV operator lost more than 100,000 premium subscribers in the previous financial year. It has lost a further 40,000 subscribers to date. As a councillor he was supposed to look after the people in his ward but ANC Tshwane’s Sipho Maselane preyed on the people and has been sentenced to 58 years and life imprisonment for robbery and rape. Fed up with a lack of coverage by the public broadcaster, the IFP yesterday decided to act by picketing the SABC’s offices in Joburg. A former bodybuilder is apparently flexing his muscles and raking in the dough as the executive head in the Tshwane mayor’s office, despite allegedly only having a matric certificate and a personal training certification. READ MORE: Aucamp resigns after qualifications scandal Makhura ‘a Gauteng shoo-in’ Gauteng Premier David Makhura who is also acting ANC provincial chairperson, is set to be confirmed as the permanent chairperson at the party’s July 20-22 elective provincial conference. The mystery surrounding the death of a 62-year-old medical doctor at a Sasolburg, Free State lodge took a new turn when a couple appeared in court yesterday, for being in possession of his car. President Ramaphosa is consolidating his power at the Union Buildings, bringing in ANC stalwarts and some of the people who helped him win the ruling party’s leadership race. The Eskom board met unions in Johannesburg yesterday in an attempt to resolve the current salary increase impasse.