Court battles between the ANC leadership and disaffected branches claiming gatekeeping and the abuse of party processes have been averted in Mpumalanga and KwaZulu-Natal. Interventions by the ANC’s national dispute resolution committee, headed by deputy secretary general Jessie Duarte, to address the complaints by branches — such as the names of deceased party members being included on audited branch membership lists — appear to have paid off in both provinces. In Mpumalanga, members of branches from the Nkomazi region who had threatened to go to court over fraudulent memberships and to demand a provincial general council (PGC) this week said they were satisfied with the attempts to address their complaints. Ronnie Malomane, one of six members who had issued Luthuli House with notice of their intention to go to court, said that, after a meeting between the provincial leadership and the head office last Thursday, they had been informed that the PGC would go ahead by the end of August. “This is a relief for all of us,’’ said Malomane. “We need to see the ANC winning the next election, but if we are distracted it is a problem. “There is no longer a threat of legal action from our side. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.