In the local headlines today: Investec wants the Competition Commission’s conduct declared “vexatious and unreasonable” by the Competition Tribunal in the Forex case against currency traders, accusing it of repeated delays, flip-flopping on issues and flouting procedures. Former Eskom chairman Ben Ngubane sought to blacklist newspapers that published stories critical of the power utility. An impasse in wage talks has for the second time in 2018 threatened the national power supply amid reports of intimidation, sabotage and obstruction of access at power stations. The International Monetary Fund yesterday welcomed President Cyril Ramaphosa’s measures to turn the country’s economy around, create jobs and reduce inequality and poverty. An awaiting-trial prisoner allegedly used a cellphone fitted with an identity manipulation app to pose as National Prosecuting Authority boss Shaun Abrahams to dupe prosecutors to drop car theft charges against him. The high court in Johannesburg yesterday stripped away Grace Mugabe’s last legal protection against assault charges in SA ... but government departments have yet to take action. A headmaster and security guard have been charged with murder and 25 counts of assault following the death of a 19-year old student four years ago. Shortly after his historic meeting with Kim Jong Un last month, Donald Trump proudly declared on Twitter: “There is no longer a Nuclear Threat from North Korea.” But new evidence indicates the regime is working on one or two liquid-fuelled intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) outside Pyongyang, reports the Washington Post, citing unnamed officials familiar with recent US intelligence. (Quartz) Vivendi is planning to sell up to 50% of Universal Music Group, the company said Monday. The French media giant said it would sell half of UMG, whose artists include Lady Gaga and Drake, to “one or more strategic partners, in order to extract the highest value” from the subsidiary. “An IPO was ruled out due to its complexity,” Vivendi said in a statement accompanying the release of its half-yearly results. (Variety) The media firm said it would hire an outside law firm to investigate allegations that the longtime CEO sexually harassed various women. CBS shares fell 5% in the first day of trading since the New Yorker published an exposé describing the allegations. (The New Yorker)