Red adorned the Union Buildings yesterday, and a 12-gun salute rang out across Pretoria as the President of the People’s Republic of China, Xi Jinping, began his third state visit to South Africa. Eskom’s financial troubles are far from over, with Scopa demanding answers regarding deviations and expansions worth hundreds of millions of rand. Mzwanele Manyi’s bid to dispose of his subsidiary that owns the paper formerly known as The New Age has been met with fierce opposition. Thabani Mzolo intends pleading guilty to the murder of student Zolile Khumalo, says his attorney. Two of SA’s largest state-owned companies have announced they have new funding from Chinese state banks, with Eskom securing $2.5-billion and Transnet R4-billion The fraud and investigations manager at Sars, Yegan Mundie, who allegedly ran a new “rogue unit” for suspended commissioner Tom Moyane, resigned with immediate effect on Tuesday SA’s largest iron ore miner lost R2-billion in revenue in the first half of the year due to problems on SA’s premier railway line, including train cancellations and four derailments, Kumba Iron Ore CEO Themba Mkhwanazi said on Tuesday. Police Minister Bheki Cele visited Zwelihle yesterday to meet residents. During his visit on Friday to the troubled kasi outside Hermanus, in the Western Cape, he was not well received. DA leader Mmusi Maimane is calling on all South Africans to join him in a national fuel hike strike. Since the beginning of the year, there have been nearly 180 attacks on cash-in-transit vans. Yesterday, new technology to reduce the number of robberies was introduced. A partnership with Russia might be beneficial to SA’s platinum sector, Mineral Resources Minister Gwede Mantashe said yesterday. The father who shot and killed his son “by mistake” will stand for trial for his death The recent spate of taxi killings which claimed 15 lives in two weeks are believed to be revenge attacks following a dispute over the Mall of Africa route. The days of Tshwane Metro Police Department officers wrecking their vehicles and not paying for it are coming to an end after the city unveiled 103 new Ford Ranger bakkies to be used in their specialised anti cable theft unit. The DA and Western Cape Premier Helen Zille say there is nothing wrong with her inclusion on a panel making recommendations on party members to be deployed to provincial legislatures and to Parliament after next year’s elections.