David Makhura has been elected the Gauteng ANC chairperson after he was nominated unopposed at the party’s provincial conference currently underway in Irene, just outside of Tshwane. Former Tshwane mayor Sputla Ramokgopa declined nomination to contest against Makhura for the ANC in Gauteng’s top position. Until recently, the Gauteng Premier has been holding the position in an acting capacity after Paul Mashatile was elected ANC treasurer general last December. Makhura previously served as ANC provincial secretary before he was elected deputy chair in the previous term.
Education MEC Panyaza Lesufi and economics development and agriculture MEC Lebogang Maile will go head to head for the position of deputy chairperson after the two accepted nomination in the early hours of Saturday morning. With Makhura elected, the deputy chairperson has become the most sought after position, as the successful candidate will stand a good chance to take over as chairperson and provincial premier in future. Maile is mainly supported by those who are pushing for generational mix within the party to allow young people space to play a role in the top leadership. Seen as Mashatile’s protégé, Maile is supported by Gauteng’s biggest region Ekurhuleni, part of Johannesburg and Tshwane regions. Lesufi has been endorsed by most regions in the province including Sedibeng, West Rand and Johannesburg. His endorsement by Johannesburg and West Rand came after last minute horse trading which saw former Johannesburg mayor Parks Tau declining the position of deputy chairperson and accepted the position of treasurer and former West Rand chairperson Boysie Maneli as provincial secretary on Lesufi slate. Tau will be up against Ekurhuleni mayor and ANC regional chairperson Mzwandile Masina for the position of treasurer. Maneli will go head to head with Emfuleni Mayor Jacob Khawe for the influential position of provincial secretary. Shaka Radebe and Nomantu Ralehoko will contest for the position of deputy provincial secretary.