Forget food, fashion and luxury, France believes it has a new image to sell: innovation. Last week I joined a small group of South African journalists invited by the French government to showcase its technology, industry and entrepreneurship. Most of the projects we visited pre-date the presidency of Emmanuel Macron, the country’s 40-year-old leader, who won decisive majorities in both the presidential and parliamentary elections about a year ago, but they tie in with the promised economic reforms that brought him to office. We visited a multitude of programmes with a whole lexicon of innovation: startups, accelerators, incubators, hubs, clusters, valleys and ecosystems, covering activities as diverse as aerospace, digital, biotech, the internet of things, agriculture and social enterprise. These range from huge, decades-old businesses, notably aerospace giant Airbus, which has a listed market value of €77-billion, to startups that no longer have to begin life in a garage. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.