The ANC’s new KwaZulu-Natal leadership wants former presidents Jacob Zuma and Thabo Mbeki to campaign for the governing party ahead of next year’s national and provincial elections. Speaking to the Mail & Guardian this week, newly elected provincial secretary Mdumiseni Ntuli said the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal wanted the party’s national executive committee (NEC) to reconsider its decision to distance the party from Zuma’s court appearances. Ntuli, who was elected on the “unity”’ slate at the ANC’s KwaZulu-Natal conference, defeating incumbent Super Zuma, said the conference outcome gave the party a solid base ahead of next year’s elections. The former deputy chief whip in the KwaZulu-Natal legislature was part of the same leadership contingent elected with Super Zuma at the November 2015 elective conference, which was declared unlawful by the high court in Pietermaritzburg last September. Seen by the applicants in the case — supporters of former premier and provincial chairperson Senzo Mchunu — as the most acceptable of the opposing camp’s leaders, Ntuli became an obvious choice to take over as provincial secretary. This was partly as a result of the work he did as a member of the provincial task team entrusted with running the new conference. “One of the things we have attained at this conference is that we are united. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.