Dozens of Prasa officials, including senior executives and general managers have been busted for failing to disclose that their business partners scored contracts worth R87-million from the embattled state-owned entity. The BBC reporter who did a documentary in which a man is shown claiming to have raped and infected dozens of women with HIV has gone to ground as it emerged that the story was false and as police close in on him. The deadly shooting of a parent in front of learners at a Joburg school has been linked to a raging drug turf war in the area. Finance Minister Nhlanhla Nene will set up an independent inquiry into the affairs of the PIC and has instructed its board to conduct a forensic investigation into CEO Dan Matjila and CFO Matshepo More. EFF sets its sights on government positions The EFF is set to shake up the political space once again in 2019, as it eyes government positions ahead of the polls. The deterioration of the global trade environment amid a worsening trade war between the US and China dominated the Brics summit in Johannesburg on Wednesday, with Chinese President Xi Jinping issuing a stern warning that those pursuing a trade war would “only end up hurting themselves.” The Citizen A project intended to create jobs and contribute to South Africa’s aeronautical industry has apparently burned through R133-million over 12 years, without yielding a single tangible result, and is still in its “conceptual” phase. It is not surprising newly elected KZN ANC chairperson Sihle Zikalala has begun to waver in his support for former president Jacob Zuma as he realises that the carpet is slowly being pulled from under Zuma’s feet, a political analyst says. MEC’s bodyguards in North West say they are overworked and fatigued, and this has led to an increase in car crashes when transporting VIPs. Robert Marawa returns to the radio airwaves on August 1, and he is expected to be accompanied by his trusted producer Beverly Maphangwa and the popular Room Dividers segment. A drug to treat high blood pressure for almost 12 500 South Africans is being recalled after the active ingredient was shown to be contaminated by a potentially cancer-causing chemical. Mali faces huge challenges. Through the upcoming presidential election, Malians will tell the next president what they will and won’t accept for their future. (The Conversation) The United States and the European Union stepped back from the brink of a trade war after President Trump said the Europeans agreed to work toward lowering tariffs and other trade barriers. (The New York Times) New Zealand has passed world-first legislation granting victims of domestic violence 10 days paid leave to allow them to leave their partners, find new homes and protect themselves and their children. (The Guardian)