Waste-picker co-operatives, which were promised three-wheeler “kariki” motorbikes, have seen no delivery on the promise — despite a R26-million payout in a questionable contract. But the Gauteng department of agriculture and rural development insists it is holding on to the karikis, stored at the Enviro Mobi workshop in Krugersdorp, because “waste pickers do not have secure storage”. It also said that it had not handed over the karikis because the waste pickers had not obtained licences. But waste pickers, who represent 15 co-operatives in the Ekurhuleni municipality, argue that they have the capacity to store the karikis and have been waiting to be taken for licence testing. READ MORE: Kariki carts finally reach the people “They are toying with us because we completed our learners’ [licences] last year, but we have not been taken for any further training … There are plenty of places where we can store these scooters, but when we ask questions we are told the scooters will be delivered,” said Suzan Kubheka from Intleindaloyakhe Waste Co-operative in Daveyton. Duduzile Mchunu of the Lakhwisha Waste Co-operative in Vosloorus, which employs about 10 people, said they were told in May that Gauteng agriculture MEC Lebogang Maile would be handing over the karikis at an Enviro Mobi function. “When they say it is a handover you are thinking that finally this [kariki] is coming to me,” said Mchunu, “only to find out when we get there we were getting our learner’s licences back. So, the handover was [giving] them back to us and they said they’d deliver the bikes two days later.” The Gauteng agriculture department’s head of communication, Roleta Lebelo, said the May 30 function was for Maile to showcase the karikis. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.