Unions say the Constitutional Court’s judgment on Thursday could spell the end of labour broking. The court, in a majority judgment, interpreted the Labour Relations Act (LRA) to mean that labour-broker workers, after a three-month period, become permanent employees of the companies they are contracted to. The case, which was brought to the court by labour-broking company Assign Services and heard in February, dealt with the 2015 amendment to the LRA, which granted new rights to labour-broker workers. The 2015 amendment was the result of persistent calls to ban the much-maligned practice of labour broking. But Assign Services insisted during the court hearing that the unions’ interpretation of this section in fact disadvantages employees of labour brokers. Section 198 of the LRA limits labour-broking contracts to three months, after which the law considers a worker a permanent employee of the client company that has contracted the worker through a labour-broking company. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.