As what has been called the coldest day of 2018 swept across Johannesburg on Tuesday, dozens of people found themselves destitute after their homes and belongings were destroyed in fires that affected 40 shacks in Alexandra and Soweto. South Africa’s densely built informal settlements are often razed by devastating fires, which spread rapidly because secure electrical connections often don’t exist and people instead use candles, open flames and gas or paraffin stoves for lighting, heating and cooking. But now a technology solution is at hand that could mean a faster reaction time to emergencies from residents and authorities. Lumkani fire detectors are low-cost networked devices that can detect fires as soon as they flare up. These devices, which have been designed specifically for informal settlements, register rapid spikes in temperature, triggering an alarm that uses radio frequencies to alert devices in neighbouring homes. The detectors are controlled by a central smart device, which locates the GPS co-ordinates of the fire and sends text messages to the neighbours to warn them. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.