Gauteng Premier David Makhura is likely to be elected unopposed as the ANC’s Gauteng chairperson after ANC branches that were expected to revolt against him decided to support him. The ANC regional conference in Ekurhuleni last weekend resolved to endorse Makhura to take over the powerful position of provincial chairperson that was left vacant after Paul Mashatile was elected to national office as ANC treasurer general in December. ANC leaders in the Johannesburg and Sedibeng regions, which held their conferences last weekend, told the Mail & Guardian that they would also throw their weight behind Makhura as the new provincial chair. Makhura’s relationship with branches in some of the regions in Gauteng has been turbulent in recent weeks, following his decision to refer alleged tender irregularities in the economic development department, led by MEC Lebogang Maile, to the Special Investigating Unit. Maile is supported by a grouping in the province that is aligned to Mashatile and wants him elected as deputy chairperson instead of Makhura’s preferred pick, former Johannesburg mayor and ANC chair in the Jo’burg region Parks Tau. Some branches in Ekurhuleni, where Maile finds a large portion of his support, had threatened to snub Makhura and support former Tshwane mayor Kgosientso Ramokgopa, who chairs the ANC in the Tshwane region, as an alternative candidate for the top position. But it now appears that plan has been abandoned. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.