The idea of using state workers’ pension money to bail out ailing Eskom has again resurfaced, after its latest financial results revealed the unrelenting stress it is facing. ANC treasurer general Paul Mashatile reportedly told the Cape Town Press Club on Tuesday that the party is proposing that, along with splitting the utility into generation, transmission and distribution arms, the Eskom debt held by the Public Investment Corporation (PIC) be converted into equity. This idea has been mooted before but unions warned that PIC money cannot be used to bail out looted state-owned entities and any proposal would require labour’s participation in these discussions. Investment industry experts argue that the move would be questionable given Eskom’s “broken” state and in the face of other options to stabilise its finances, such as asset disposal. The PIC manages R1.9-trillion on behalf of the Government Employees’ Pension Fund (GEPF) and social welfare funds such as the Unemployment Insurance Fund. Through the PIC, the GEPF holds about R86-billion in Eskom bonds and bills, according to the fund’s most recent financials. Eskom’s debt securities and borrowings amounted to R388-billion as of March 31, according to its annual results. “We must be open for engagement … as labour is the biggest stakeholder in the PIC,” said Dennis George, the general secretary of the Federation of Unions of South Africa. But in a statement on Thursday, welcoming a commission of inquiry into the PIC, labour federation Cosatu warned the ANC and the state that it would strike if worker funds were used to “massage the looting done by government”. “If they want to talk about the PIC they must come to us as workers because they will not impose any decision on us about the workers money,” Cosatu said. Cosatu’s parliamentary co-ordinator Matthew Parks said Cosatu did not want to see state-owned entities collapse, particularly Eskom, given the threat it poses to the economy and the role it is expected to play in national development. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.