South Africa is still a key market for the world’s largest brewer, Anheuser-Busch InBev. The brewer is building its world domination on the emerging market lessons learned from acquiring SABMiller two years ago. AB InBev, also the biggest company on the JSE, believes that bigger is indeed better — for market domination, that is — but also that you need a specific strategy for a particular market. Analysts say that the African market, opened up by AB InBev’s SABMiller acquisition, will be a key driver of the kind of growth the brewing behemoth is eyeing. The Belgium-based company produces a third of the world’s beer and its R1.27‑trillion takeover of SABMiller in 2016 was largely done to acquire SABMiller’s emerging markets, of which South Africa was regarded as the crown jewel. Neil Brown, a co-fund manager and equity analyst at Electus Fund Managers, said AB InBev was indeed very powerful, with about 30% of global beer sales by volume and 45% of the global beer profit pool. The brewer’s regional chief executive, Ricardo Tadeu, told the Mail & Guardian that the brewer’s investment had paid off and that SABMiller had provided enlightening insights into emerging markets. “We learned from SABMiller about understanding the market maturities of each country much better,” he said. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.