Nigerian Afro-beat with Femi Koya: The composer, saxophonist and singer combines West African highlife and jazz with his nostalgic Afro-beat roots. Through his history of migration from West to Southern Africa, Koya’s music creates a sonic dialogue between the continent’s different regions.
Details: Koya will perform in Makhanda (the new name for Grahamstown) as a part of the National Arts Festival. The performance will take place at the DSG Hall on July 6 from 8.30pm. Tickets cost R95 a person and can be purchased at the door or at the various festival ticket outlets. For more information visit nationalartsfestival.co.za Both, and: This exhibition, featuring the works of about 50 artists, is a reflection on the opposite of dualistic thinking, the idea that an idea can exist outside the axes of either/or and celebrates the gallery’s 15-year existence as an entity jointly owned by 11 directors.  The show is curated by its two newest partners, Sisipho Ngodwana and Alexander Richards. Details: The show, which will be simultaneously held in Johannesburg and Cape Town, opens this weekend and ends in August and will kick off with a party on Saturday. For more information go to stevenson.info/ The Stellenbosch International Chamber Music Festival: With more than 29 artists and 30 concerts on it’s programme, the festival also has a tradition of commissioning a composer to write a new work. This weekend, composer Neo Muyanga will present Makeda, based on the artist’s juxtaposing of two historical figures — singer Miriam Makeba and Makeda, believed to be the Ethiopian Queen of Sheba (circa 1 000 BCE).  The singers performing are Brittany Smith (soprano), Siphokazi Molteno (mezzo soprano), Ongama Mhlonthlo (tenor) and Ntando Ngcume (baritone). Details: The festival takes place from July 6 to 15 at the Endler Hall, Stellenbosch University. Tickets are available at Computicket. For more information, contact Fiona Grayer on 021 808 2358 or visit sicmf.co.zaAdChoicesADVERTISINGinRead invented by Teads