It was in the early 1980s on a train ride to Germiston that Panyaza Lesufi was pushed towards political activism when, as a teenager, he came face-to-face with the injustices of apartheid’s racial segregation. “My father was going to apply for an ID book for me, a dompas at that time. And we were travelling from Tembisa to Germiston and here comes a train with 11 coaches, almost seven were empty and the remaining four were squashed [with passengers],” Lesufi said. “I said to my dad: ‘Papa, those ones are empty, let’s go there.’ And my father said, ‘No! You can’t go there.’ But my dad was not ready to tell me why I could not go in there.” The empty coaches the 15-year-old Lesufi was forbidden to board were reserved for white passengers, leaving the majority black passengers to fill the remaining few carriages. Since that encounter he has dedicated his career to fighting injustice and protecting the rights of the “weak, the vulnerable and the poor”. Last weekend Lesufi, who is Gauteng’s education minister, was elected deputy chairperson of the ANC in the province following a close contest with economic development MEC Lebogang Maile, whom he defeated by only 22 votes. “It’s very scary because the expectations are too high and it’s reasonable why they are too high. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.