City of Cape Town council Speaker Dirk Smit has confirmed that a motion of no confidence in Cape Town mayor Patricia de Lille will be tabled on the council agenda for Thursday, despite allegations of due process being flouted. Shaun August — a Democratic Alliance (DA) chief whip and councillor who is a former Pollsmoor prison warder — has laid a complaint with the DA’s federal executive against two members of the party’s Cape Town caucus who submitted the motion of no confidence against De Lille. In a letter to the federal executive and its chairperson James Selfe last week, August said that the motion was “highly irregular” because, he alleges, due process was flouted. READ MORE: DA moves to oust De Lille again The DA councillor who brought the motion against De Lille — Marian Nieuwoudt — and one Brenda Hansen, who seconded the motion, allegedly broke the DA caucus rules, August said. This is because — according to August —  the motion was meant to be endorsed by the DA caucus and approved by the federal executive before it was handed to the speaker of the council for his consideration. August said that the two councillors also breached the party’s constitution and could face the possibility of losing their membership, because the federal executive had not deliberated on the motion at the time it was submitted to the council speaker. Clause 3.5.1.14 of the party’s constitution says that a person’s membership can cease if they: “being a public representative of the Party in a legislative body, introduces a motion of no confidence in any government controlled by the Party, or in which the party is in coalition, or office-bearer in such a government, except with the leave of the Federal Executive”. This forms part of the same section — cessation of membership — of the DA’s constitution which was used to terminate De Lille’s membership in May. In his letter, August wrote that the party’s rules were being broken to aid the political motives of a certain faction in the caucus. “This is no different to many of the previous decisions whereby caucus rules are flouted in the aim to drive a particular agenda by a small group of individuals, or those perceived influential within the party,” August wrote. “In the light of the current political situation within the City of Cape Town, I trust that the party will uphold the rules and regulations that we as public representatives are all bound by,” he added. Selfe did not respond to requests for comment at the time of publishing, but Smit, in his capacity as speaker of the council, said that the De Lille motion of no confidence will go ahead on Thursday. Smit said that the speaker has to determine if the motion has passed three tests before it can be tabled on council’s agenda. The three tests, he said, are: if the date is correct, if a sitting councillor submitted the motion, and if it is within the ambit of council to decide on the contents of the motion — in this case, a motion of no confidence in De Lille. “Those tests were passed by me and I’ve sent the motion forward to the city manager to add it to the agenda to be debated on,” Smit said. He confirmed that the motion of no confidence in De Lille will be debated on Thursday. Smit himself is facing a motion of no confidence — tabled by ANC councillor Xolani Sotashe — who has accused Smit of being influenced by DA factionalism which has allegedly conflicted his role as speaker. “He has lost control of the council, he has no authority,” Sotashe said. “We told him don’t allow yourself to be manipulated by a cabal, but he didn’t listen.” The DA caucus has been divided over infighting between members who support De Lille and those who back caucus deputy leader JP Smith. A letter submitted by Smith to the DA is widely believed to be the basis for the party’s investigation into De Lille’s alleged misconduct. The motion of no confidence will be the third De Lille has faced this year, after the mayor survived an earlier motion in February in council,  and an internal DA caucus motion of no confidence in her succeeded in April.