A report reveals that weak financial controls are at the centre of the airline’s woes Poor land governance, desperation for a better life and little sense of market pricing has left the idyllic village ripe for the plucking ‘I prefer to cook for these people for free than to sell the food even. I enjoy it because we use the big, big pots’ There’s a good chance the ex-president’s new heavyweights will claim he won’t get a fair trial The party is celebrating its fifth anniversary and its parliamentarians must ensure its growth Panyaza Lesufi’s focus is on the poor, and on what the ANC needs to do to win back unhappy voters Makhura reportedly supported a group that backed former Johannesburg mayor Parks Tau as his deputy Coffee Bay’s pristine seaside land is home to some of South Africa’s most popular holiday resorts and remains in the hands of the Bomvana and Pondo tribes.
But this has not translated into a better life, as the locals claim they’re being exploited by the tourism sector We used to laugh at the idea that Mars had canals — now it turns out there’s a whole fricking lake A Constitutional Court ruling on labour-broking ends uncertainty over dual employment The ANC’s new KwaZulu-Natal leaders want the NEC to let the former president campaign South African Communist Party (SACP) KwaZulu-Natal provincial secretary Themba Mthembu is unlikely to survive the party’s upcoming congress Rural dwellers displaced in the pursuit of corporate profits lose far more than just their land The minister has slammed the board for not properly handling allegations levelled at the CEO Mention intimate partner violence and everyone thinks about man-on-woman abuse — it’s time to rethink that A new drug could save 25 000 women living with HIV, but could it come at the cost of their babies’ lives? For better or worse, it is time to discover what the ‘new Zimbabwe’ really looks like Zimbabwe’s main opposition coalition will participate in Monday’s general election under protest. Chief Nhlanhlayemangwe Ndiweni of Ntabazinduna in Zimbabwe’s Matabeleland South province says being apolitical has led to ruling party Zanu-PF heavyweights persecuting him. Even before the first vote has been cast, it is apparent that the entire affair has been rigged Lessons learnt in the 2013-2015 epidemic in West Africa helped limit the highly contagious disease The idea has been floated before but again unions warn that the funds can’t be used to bail out SOEs The Asian giant is aware of the risks of lending to South Africa’s ailing parastatals, so the question is: Why would it? There would be major ramifications if the threats over the mine’s recent safety record scupper the takeover Besides Sibanye’s internal investigations, it has held two safety summits and has formed a task team to tackle the causes of the fatalities The behemoth brewer has grown almost as much as it can but one continent remains untapped Some retailers, recognising an opportunity to gain significant marketing mileage, have been quick to respond by introducing plastic alternatives Trusts are often used to manage property when beneficiaries are unable to do it properly themselves. The Ingonyama Trust is different If SA wants to regain its global standing, it must take a moral stand that may irk its new friends ‘The DA is not the only political actor in the country that is using foreigners as a convenient scapegoat for our significant economic problems’ ‘Of particular concern is the independence — or lack thereof — of the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission’ Our readers write in about Global Citizen and the Dutch Reformed Church The ANC’s KwaZulu-Natal conference was finally held. Ace held up his slate. It didn’t go his way. Cyril’s happy South Africa is part of a club whose members are corrupt, repressive, exploitative leaders China’s increasing global links means the other Brics members need to draw in the rest of Africa According to some Russian observers, Vladimir Putin relishes his international image as “a Bond villain”. But as Joss Whedon, the creator of the cult classic TV show Buf fy the Vampire Slayer, once remarked: “Bad guys don’t think that they’re bad guys; bad guys think that they’re heroes.” Blighted by a series of political scandals, the country’s hard-won democracy is on the skids The priorities and themes of the 10th Brics summit, ranging from peacekeeping to collaboration around the Fourth Industrial Revolution, provide a number of issues that summit leaders say they want to pursue. India’s leader will talk the peace talk but turns a blind eye to brutality in his own backyard Women, celebrate achievements besides those of marrying and having babies ‘Let me start by commending you on taking to the skies to advertise your establishment. To my knowledge, no other local brands other than SAA, Kulula and Mango are occupying airspace in an effort to lure customers.’ The number of researchers is growing but R&D needs far more investment I’ve been working late. One night last week I came home from work at 3.15am. It’s the kind of thing that makes my mother worry. And what happened last Tuesday was exactly the kind of thing she imagines when she thinks about big, bad Jo’burg. It’s Personal by Langa Mavuso, Seven Colour Sundays, Ukumisa Insika by Wonder Buhle Mbambo Comedy Central presents Drunk History, Born into Struggle, Honeydew’s Carnival Fever by Cray Mahalia Francis Allegations and counter-allegations are flying between the board’s chair, management and staff The curator cum activist understands creatives’ struggles and is working to rectify this situation A dramatist and petrol attendant who wrote Imbewu is up against entertainment industry heavyweights behind the TV series Imbewu: The Seed There are two ways to define the hive mind concept. In science fiction, this is when the unified consciousness of aliens helps them gain control over each alien’s uniqueness. The second concept refers to a collaboration where people share their respective knowledge and skills with one another to reach a common goal. Everything about it is deeply personal and spiritual, yet it has you dancing with arms raised Traces of Sandy B’s legacy, punctuated by a1994 hit, are imprinted on the  genre as we know it today A daughter of the 1820 Settlers looks at events that ruthlessly shaped the lives of those linked to the Kowie River South African tennis is enjoying a revival as our young players rocket up the world rankings On a court originally built in 1530 for King Henry VIII, the top players are laying chases and hitting boomerangs, giraffes and railroads Bafana’s gifted attacker faces the very real danger of becoming lost in the wilderness Despite crushing losses, South Africa’s U20 women’s volleyball side gives its all on the court