The never-ending battle over the throne of the Bapedi Marota, which has been the subject of court litigation for almost three decades, may be nearing its end. The high court in Pretoria refused long-time protagonist Kgagudi Kenneth (KK) Sekhukhune leave to appeal an earlier judgment, in which he was deposed as acting kgoshikgolo (king) of the Bapedi Marota. The kingdom, which boasted victories over the Voortrekkers and the British, was one of the strongest and largest in Southern Africa in the mid to late 1800s under Sekhukhune I, whose kingdom stretched from the Vaal River in the south to the Limpopo River in the north. But it has been dogged by bitter battles for the throne since the king was murdered by his half-brother and heir to the throne, Mampuru  I, in 1882. The battle has continued into the present, with KK Sekhukhune, his half-brother Rhyne Thulare Sekhukhune and his son Thulare Victor Thulare the protagonists in recent years. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.