Monday. It’s the first day back at work after two weeks of leave, but I already feel like I need a holiday. I’m more staring through the laptop screen than at it, wondering which of the four thousand, twelve hundred and eleventy three ­billion emails that have piled up over my 14 days of absence from wage ­slavery to read first. I’d been dreading this moment from the time my eyes opened, hours ago: the return to the treadmill, the nonstop noise, the social media deluge, the daily, waist-deep immersion in the nasty, ­stinking, cesspool of dirty money and dirtier politics. It could be the after-effects of the four or so Amstel quarts and the liver special with raw chutney I threw down my neck at genius guitarist Bheki Khoza’s gig at the Rainbow the previous afternoon, but I’m not feeling up for this. Then again it could just be a sign that I’m too old for this shit and that even two weeks isn’t long enough for the batteries to recharge these days. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.