Last-ditch talks are to take place between the ANC national leadership and disaffected Mpumalanga party members this weekend in an attempt to resolve their high court bid to stop 108 “ghost” branches from taking part in the provincial list process ahead of next year’s national and provincial elections. The move comes after branch members, led by Ronnie Malomane, approached the high court in Pretoria, sitting as the circuit court in Mbombela, last Friday to request a two-part order to prevent the 108 branches from participating in the list conference and to disband the provincial executive committee. The branches had gone to court after a breakdown in negotiations at Luthuli House, the ANC’s national headquarters, which had instructed that the “cloned” branches in the Inkomazi region be consolidated with legitimate branch structures. The ANC’s national dispute resolution committee had also found that several branches had “ghost” members (ANC members who had died but were still on the branch membership lists) and had ordered a membership audit. Last Friday, after hearing argument from counsel for the ANC and the Mpumalanga members, Judge Segopotje Mphahlele postponed the application until December 13. The judge ordered that the applicants provide the court with supplementary affidavits regarding their claims about the cloned branches in the Inkomazi region and that the provincial executive committee under former chairperson David Mabuza had been elected unlawfully on the basis of inflated membership figures. Mphahlele ruled that, if the parties wished to settle out of court, they should do so by December 4 and present their agreement to the court. Irate branch members have staged marches and other protests in Mpumalanga and at Luthuli House in Johannesburg, demanding that the provincial executive committee be disbanded and replaced with a provincial task team. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.