R5.9-million is alleged to have been paid from Floyd’s brother to Malema’s relative It’s not often that Bible verses and Dickens are quoted in the same speech, especially when the speech is to outline the medium-term budget One recommends criminal charges against Cape Town’s mayor, an MEC and other city officials have been named Jabba drew inspiration from everything and his response was emotional and spontaneous Residents claim politicians flock to Khayelitsha in times of tragedy, but leave with empty promises A single image of the aftermath of the blaze cannot tell the whole story Axed Transnet chief executive Siyabonga Gama on Thursday brought urgent contempt of court proceedings against the state entity, asking board members to say why they should not be imprisoned for 90 days or fined. Officials say vacancies for senior officials, including directors general, won’t be filled A backlash against ANC deputy president David Mabuza appears to be playing itself out in the governing party’s list process ahead of next year’s national and provincial elections, and he may fail to secure the number two position on the list. The king designate wants reconciliation to rebuild the nation but his opponents are not bending Here are some global hotspots overwhelmed by visitors that authorities have moved to protect An upsurge in violence in Blikkiesdorp is linked to residents competing for homes in a new housing scheme ‘This business saved my life and I have no intention of doing any other work except this. I started this business because jobs were scarce’ They were also unable to account for more than R15-million in property under their control Poor practices in the industry lead to disease, use of antibiotics and contamination of water and soil The chief executive says internet users are under surveillance and companies use data as a weapon Italy’s competition authority has fined Apple and Samsung €10-million and €5-million respectively for the ‘planned obsolescence’ of their smartphones The town is failing to fix pollution, and oil, fats and grease from factories aren’t helping The Botleng wastewater treatment plant, despite its R60-million upgrade, is overgrown In his speech, Finance Minister Tito Mboweni reprioritised millions for new health workers and hospital upgrades.
Here’s what he needs to do next. For transgender people, daily hormone injections can be a matter of life or death. But many medical aids still see gender-affirming treatment as a choice rather than a necessity. Begoto Miarom leads the continental fight against corruption. But he is under-resourced and not especially well-informed More than half of Malagasy prisoners have yet to face trial, but live in squalid, dangerous conditions There is little outrage in our country for foreigners killed here by their governments Mboweni has been applauded for his opening performance. But can he steal the show? This week’s medium-term budget policy statement (MTBPS) was a bitter pill for markets to swallow and could affect how ratings agencies, especially Moody’s, view the country’s prospects, according to analysts. Government departments themselves are going to have find the money for unbudgeted increases More than 70% of the revenue shortfall that South Africa faces in 2018 is because of a four-year backlog of unpaid value-added tax (VAT) refunds. And, because of the tough economic climate, revenue collected in the coming years is not expected to improve. A growing financial crisis and governance failures at local and provincial government level have been identified as a “serious fiscal risk” by the treasury in the medium-term budget policy statement (MTBPS). The finance minister has opened the door to decisions that may have serious ramifications for state businesses The finance minister has vowed to tackle rampant corruption and municipal dysfunction The rand dropped after the finance minister’s ‘lackadaisical’ maiden budget speech A lawyer can be tough in their cross-examination of a rape survivor without retraumatising them ‘This week, South Africans overcame in some ways the silence and shame tied to menstruation’ ‘Corruption is not a question of ethics. It is a criminal matter’ Our readers write in about M&G’s bias, and constitutional reform “I’d been dreading going to Sars. With all the filth that’s coming out at the Nugent commission into the tax authority I didn’t hold much hope that filing would be a particularly pleasant experience” It spells danger in the Middle East and will affect relations with the West (if trade doesn’t hold sway) Despite the evidence of Denel’s missiles being used, the country is still fawning over its Saudi benefactors Its social and economic focus was in step with its emancipatory role before its 1993 volte-face Exploring the violence of black men through the writings of Darnell Moore gives some answers ‘According to Floyd, who is of course the Economic Freedom Fighters’ leading ideologue, Gordhan is actually the minister of everything’ Criminal activity leeches into the education system because of what pupils are exposed to elsewhere In between working on Friday copy, this is what the team reads, listens to and watches For good vibes and an arts fix, don’t miss this Although he didn’t start the style, Jabba is considered a motswako pioneer, raising the bar for the style and influencing a generation of rappers “Perhaps a feminist deity gave birth to feminist sons so they could raise the sort of men they would have wanted to be surrounded by.” The world can be a hate-filled place but love, the essence of our being, makes it beautiful Even though I have a pitifully large collection of rejections, blunders and heartbreaks, I’m willing to try again and again. A young man’s heartbreak lands softly, though reluctantly into the nest of friendship that he has built with his favourite sibling “Since when is marriage a path to liberation?” Song ‘Princes Familiar’ gives an example of the importance of the first relationship some women have been privileged to have: our first love. “As a teen I worried about my dimpled thighs, but then I had to deal with mental and physical illness.” “I should have said it out plainly on that lunch break: she’s actually fucking beautiful, you numbnuts.” Research says people use smell to find mates and personal experience show women are better at it Professional footballers, who have to retire young, need different investment vehicles Young footballers should follow the lead of older players who’ve invested wisely But the midfield has turned his life around with help from family and friends like the Wits coach History hovers over occasion as sold-out Calabash prepares to welcome debutants in stirring Soweto Derby