More than 250 people who were shot and arrested during the Marikana massacre in 2012 are angered by the department of justice’s failure to make payments to them for their losses. They have been in discussion with the state for more than six years. It is understood that the state made a settlement offer, which the wounded and arrested miners accepted on August 29 this year. Two weeks later, in a letter seen by the Mail & Guardian, state attorney Gosiame Seleka confirms the number of claimants and the amounts to be paid to each of theme. There are 253 claimants and “the total amount payable therefore is R97 685 00”, reads the letter. But, to date, no payments have been made. Andries Nkome, the lawyer for the wounded and arrested miners, said he has been in communication with the state attorney’s office. “It looks like the department of justice has not instructed the SAPS [South African Police Service] to make payments to the wounded and arrested and we don’t know the reason why. To date they have not given us one,” he told the M&G. Nkome added that his clients say they only receive information on the payments through the media. “These people have not had direct correspondence [from the department of justice] as to where their payments are and have been hearing about it in the media and this is how justice has continued to treat them,” Nkome said. “The miners keep calling us and asking if we are sure that we have not received the payments. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.