This week’s medium-term budget policy statement (MTBPS) was a bitter pill for markets to swallow and could affect how ratings agencies, especially Moody’s, view the country’s prospects, according to analysts. “We expect Moody’s to change the outlook of our Baa3 sovereign credit rating from stable to negative, at the very least, with a potential downgrade after the 2019 budget if significant measures are not taken,” said Isaah Mhlanga, the executive chief economist of Alexander Forbes Investments. Key assumptions made in the 2018 February budget were revised as the treasury took account of shrinking economic growth, turmoil in international markets and steep cuts in revenue estimates. Economic growth forecasts have been cut from the 1.5% announced in February to a much weaker 0.7%, and the budget deficit for this year is now projected to reach 4% of gross domestic product (GDP) compared with the 3.6% expected in February. Revenue collection estimates have been revised down from February by R27.4-billion in 2018-2019, R24.7-billion in 2019-2020 and R33-billion in 2020-2021.  Government debt is now expected to increase to 55.8% of GDP for this year, rising to 58.5% of GDP by 2021-2022, well up from February’s estimates of 55.1% and 56.2% respectively. Moody’s is the last remaining ratings agency to class South African government debt as investment grade — albeit by only one notch — and its ratings outlook is stable. In a credit report last week, Moody’s noted that South Africa’s debt could be downgraded “if it were to become clear that the government will not stabilise its debt burden and contingent liabilities [from state-owned enterprises], and that prospects for a revival in growth falter”. The outcome of the MTBPS could affect Moody’s position, according to Citi’s South Africa chief economist, Gina Schoeman. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.