The treasury has refused to provide additional funding for the public sector salary bill, because the government can no longer afford it. While tabling his first mid-term budget policy statement, Finance Minister Tito Mboweni said the wage bill was the biggest cost pressure on the state and it had pushed out funding for other goods and services. The three-year settlement agreed on in June by the government and unions added R30.2-billion to the R212.5-billion the treasury had budgeted for salary increases and other remuneration benefits over the medium-term period. Mboweni said simply: “We have not allocated money for it.” Instead, provincial and national departments would have to find the money from the R1.8-trillion they receive. “This means increasing efficiency and carefully managing overtime and performance incentives,” according to the budget document. Treasury officials say the framework for how departments can achieve this is likely to be announced in the February 2019 budget speech and will be based on the outcome of discussions between the public service and administration department, unions and other departments. Officials say the decision will affect departments differently. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.