Administered prices have been increasing well above inflation recently, hurting consumers and businesses alike, eliciting promises from President Cyril Ramaphosa to address some of them in his recently announced stimulus package. The latest consumer price index (CPI) released by Statistics South Africa showed that inflation for all goods had increased by 4.9% year on year, but administered prices had increased by 12.1% during the same period. Excluding fuel and paraffin prices, currently major drivers of administered price inflation, these prices still rose by 7.6%. Administered prices are those determined or influenced by the government or a government agency, without any reference to market forces, according to Stats SA. Products and services that are subject to administered prices include municipal rates, water, electricity, public transport costs — including train, motor licences and motor registration costs — and school and tertiary education fees. An examination of administered prices using Stats SA data shows that, in the past two years, increases in administered prices have risen sharply above overall inflation rates. Top of mind for many South Africans has been the fuel price, which reached record levels of more than R17 a litre this week. Since September 2016, fuel prices have risen 33%, and the cost of items such as water and education have risen by 19% and 14.2% respectively. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.