A backlash against ANC deputy president David Mabuza appears to be playing itself out in the governing party’s list process ahead of next year’s national and provincial elections, and he may fail to secure the number two position on the list. This spot is traditionally occupied by the party’s deputy president. Branches around the country are currently holding meetings at which they will name their nominees for the provincial and national lists and there are already indications that the knives are out for Mabuza. ANC MPs — the pool from which members of the new Cabinet will be drawn — are elected to the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces on the basis of the lists, which are consolidated nationally after provincial and regional nominations conferences. The list process is still in its early stages, but unofficial lists used for lobbying purposes by ANC structures in two provinces, Gauteng and Mpumalanga, do not name Mabuza in the number two slot. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.