Retired judge Robert Nugent has filed papers in the Constitutional Court asking it not to hear suspended commissioner Tom Moyane’s application to put the inquiry into the South African Revenue Service (Sars) on ice. Moyane wants the highest court to set aside as unconstitutional President Cyril Ramaphosa’s decision to conduct the commission, which is chaired by Nugent, and Moyane’s disciplinary hearing at the same time. Nugent’s commission is looking into tax administration and governance at the revenue service during the time that Moyane was at the helm. The Mail & Guardian understands that the chair of the disciplinary inquiry, Azhar Bham, will not oppose Moyane’s application. Moyane faces charges of misconduct and being in violation of his duties in terms of the Sars Act and the Public Finance Management Act. The Nugent commission last held public hearings two weeks ago at which it was told that at least two irregular tenders were awarded to international firms and that whistleblowers did not come forward because they feared they would not be protected. In papers filed by Nugent on Thursday, he submits that the case does not fall into the Constitutional Court’s exclusive jurisdiction and that the court should not hear Moyane’s application, adding that it would not be “in the interests of justice to do so”. Nugent is named as the third respondent in Moyane’s application to the Constitutional Court, which was filed about two weeks ago. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.