President Cyril Ramaphosa’s administration will not fill vacancies for directors general or extend the contracts of others until the conclusion of a process that will lead to a much leaner Cabinet after the 2019 general elections. This is in line with the government’s efforts to reduce the high wage bill and improve efficiency in the state. Finance Minister Tito Mboweni this week expressed concern about the ballooning public sector wage bill and said the treasury would no longer allocate more money for public servants’ salaries, despite the government’s agreement with labour unions early this year to increase them by more than R20-billion in the next three years. The current public service wage bill is R546-billion a year, which is equivalent to 35.2% of all government spending. The Mail & Guardian reported in August that the government was planning to lay off 30 000 public servants in the next three years to cut costs. Spearheaded by the treasury, the planned restructuring of the government, which would include voluntary severance packages, would reduce the government salary bill by R20-billion. Two senior government officials, who asked to remain anonymous, said this week that steps to get rid of senior public servants, including directors general (DGs), were being taken as part of the broader plan to cut the wage bill. “What’s happening is that, since the president spoke about the configuration of the Cabinet, there’s no new DG that has been appointed. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.