The Ingonyama Trust Board (ITB), which administers about ­three million hectares of tribal land on behalf of King Goodwill Zwelithini, has failed to account for land under its control valued at R1.08-billion. The board’s failure to provide ­supporting documents to auditor general Kimi Makwetu for the land during his 2017-2018 audit, and a series of other financial management failures, have resulted in the body receiving an adverse audit. Makwetu also criticised the board, led by chairperson Jerome Ngwenya, for failing to account properly for a total of more than R28-billion in assets — including the land at nearly R2-billion — that fell under ITB control and for continuing to keep revenue from mining leases, which is supposed to be contributed to the National Revenue Fund. Although Makwetu’s final report on the board will only be tabled in Parliament in November, his initial audit report was included in the ITB’s annual report, which was tabled before Parliament’s land reform and rural development portfolio committee on October 12. Zwelithini has demanded assurances from President Cyril Ramaphosa that land under ITB control will not be affected by ­government’s plan to expropriate land without compensation and has threatened to call on his subjects to vote against the ANC should Ramaphosa fail to do so. The board has come under increasing pressure in the wake of Parliament’s high-level panel, which recommended that residents on Ingonyama Trust land be given security of tenure. It also faces a series of legal challenges to the leases it has been issuing to residents, who have historically received permission-to-occupy certificates. Meanwhile, a report submitted to Parliament’s land reform portfolio committee earlier this year by ITB staff members raises further questions about the level of control over finances and assets at the board. According to the report, which the Mail & Guardian has seen, the board agreed to purchase a Lexus SUV, registration ITB 1 ZN,for the monarch, with all running costs ­carried by the ITB. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.