Labour federation Cosatu says it will demand answers from President Cyril Ramaphosa’s administration on alleged plans to privatise Eskom despite assurances that the power utility would remain state-owned. The federation held a special central executive committee meeting in Johannesburg this week at which it resolved to oppose any attempts to privatise state-owned entities (SOEs), because it believed this would lead to more job losses and the casualisation of workers. “It will also adversely affect the state’s capacity to: provide basic services to the poor; provide for infrastructural development; intervene to restructure the economy to ensure growth and employment creation; and play a developmental role in general,” Cosatu said in a statement. Last week, the Sunday Independent reported that Eskom’s executives were mulling over their options to save the SOE, because the power utility’s debt is now more than R300-billion. Eskom confirmed that privatisation was one of the options being discussed as well as “unbundling” the utility into separate divisions, each responsible for generating income. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.