Despite a deteriorating budget outlook, Wednesday’s medium-term budget policy statement (MTBPS) granted almost R10-billion more for struggling state-owned entities (SOEs). But, said Finance Minister Tito Mboweni said in a press conference, the money for the likes of embattled SAA did not make the airline a “holy cow”. Although he laid the groundwork for what could be major changes to the government’s parastatal portfolio, emphasising the need to “reconfigure” SOEs, he stopped short of announcing the sale of noncore assets to bolster the government’s finances. “There is a lot contained in that terminology of reconfiguration,” Mboweni said. “It means among others that we should be open-minded about inviting either equity partners or be open to closure of some business activities.” Perennially troubled SAA received a R5-billion injection, an additional R1.2-billion was granted to South African Express Airways and an extra R2.9-billion was found for the South African Post Office. The department of public enterprises under Pravin Gordhan was grappling with the difficulties facing several SOEs but, Mboweni added, “if we need to close [the airline] down we should”. The working class did not travel on SAA, he added. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.