The president of the National African Federated Chamber of Commerce and Industry (Nafcoc), Lawrence Mavundla, has criticised the small business proposals in President Cyril Ramaphosa’s jobs summit framework, claiming they won’t stimulate effective small business growth. Nafcoc, which claims to represent the majority of small businesses in the country, believes the government won’t achieve immediate, large-scale job creation unless it eradicates “draconian” regulations that impede small business success and transforms the financial sector’s approach to funding small enterprises. In his address at the opening of the jobs summit last week, Ramaphosa acknowledged the importance of small businesses in creating jobs. “If we are to succeed in creating the number of jobs we need, it is essential that small, medium and micro-enterprises like these take their rightful place in the economic life of our nation,” he said. But Nafcoc has asked why it, as a representative of small business, was left out of all discussions before the summit. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.