Diplomatic hiccups are one thing — an awkward handshake or quibbles between French and Iranian diplomats over whether the banquet table will feature a few bottles of Château Latour. It’s quite another for a prominent journalist, editor and political adviser to be ambushed inside his country’s embassy and butchered by a high-level hit squad. That’s what Saudi Arabia is accused of having done to Jamal Khashoggi, who was last seen entering the Saudi embassy in Turkey on October 2. Even in an age of anti-diplomacy when protocol is subsumed by late-night Twitter tirades, what Saudi Arabia is accused of is unprecedented. The kingdom has denied involvement but hasn’t offered a credible explanation for Khashoggi’s disappearance either. It has led to a rising chorus of condemnation and a boycott by major investors of an upcoming Saudi business conference dubbed the “Davos in the Desert”. All this, however, occurs against the backdrop of an endless war in Yemen, which the United Nations warned this week could plunge 13-million people into a famine. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.