Finance Minister Nhlanhla Nene has asked President Cyril Ramaphosa to relieve him of his duties following public pressure over his testimony at the commission of inquiry into state capture at which he admitted to meetings with the Guptas. The Minerals Council SA has urged its members to approach state-capture commission to reveal any underhand or irregular approaches or dealings with former mineral resources minister Mosebenzi Zwane and his department officials. Steinhoff’s cash-strapped US operation, Mattress Firm, has filed for a voluntary bankruptcy as part of a restructuring that will result in 20% of its 3 400 stores closing and the sale of 49.9% of the business to funders who are providing $525-million to support the restructuring. Westbury residents have lashed out at the “bullying” tactics of the infamous Amaberete who are patrolling the area that after protests in the area against drug lords and other criminals. Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Mpilo Tutu celebrated his 87th birthday yesterday with his family at his bedside in a Cape Town hospital. De Lille vows to sue detractors As the time for Cape Twon mayor Patricia de Lille to vacate her office draws closer, she has fired one last salvo at her detractors, announcing that she will sue those who accused her of bribery. The Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa has narrowly avoiced leaving millions of commuters high and dry after being shut down by the Rail Safety Regulator who refused to issue a safety permit. The power utility wants to sell off core assets — but an expert says this new plan is nothing but a pipe dream, and it is clutching at straws. Finance Minister Nhlanhla Nene feels the heat after public outcry over his Gupta meetings. Mukwege, a doctor based in the Democratic Republic of Congo, has helped thousands of victims of the country’s long war. Murad, a member of Iraq’s Yazidi tribe who suffered at the hands of Islamic State, has been recognised for her work with the United Nations.
(The Conversation) The far-right Brazilian populist Jair Bolsonaro has secured a resounding victory in the first-round of his country’s presidential election, but fallen just short of the majority required to avoid a second-round run-off. (The Guardian)