A group of disgruntled ANC members in the Free State have turned to the courts to have the provincial elective conference held in May declared invalid and unconstitutional. The group is expected to have its matter heard in the high court in Bloemfontein next week, after failed attempts to have discussions with the ANC’s national executive committee (NEC) on the matter. They are accusing the provincial executive committee (PEC) of being illegitimate, because it was elected in contravention of a court order that instructed that branch general meetings be rerun in 14 branches before a new leadership was elected. The group alleges the branch general meetings were not rerun in the lead-up to the May conference, making the provincial leadership elected there unlawful. Speaking to the Mail & Guardian this week, Monnapule Ntamo, leader of the group, said going to court was a last resort after multiple attempts to resolve the matter within the ANC had failed. “We have tried everything and there is nothing that has happened. We are still open for discussion because we don’t want to use the courts to solve party matters,” Ntamo said. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.