Does heading a football give you dementia? That’s the question neuropathologist Willie Stewart is attempting to answer by comparing former professional footballers with nonplayers. Football authorities have been accused of dragging their feet on this since former England player Jeff Astle died in 2002, with industrial disease cited as the cause of death. Ex-England and Newcastle captain Alan Shearer has raised the profile of the issue by speaking about his dementia fears after years of heading balls. Stewart is investigating whether there is a direct link, and his team is comparing the medical histories of 10 000 former footballers with 30 000 nonplayers. The study, Football’s Influence on Lifelong Health and Dementia Risk, is funded by the Football Association and the Professional Footballers’ Association and aims to gather hard evidence about an emotive subject. It was Stewart who, in 2014, said that Astle had died aged 59 from chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) stemming from head injuries after examining the former player’s brain. The condition is usually associated with boxers. But he is cautious in his approach and said delving into big data is crucial because the issue is clouded by anecdote and speculation. He cites the example of three members of England’s 1966 World Cup-winning team who developed Alzheimer’s disease — Martin Peters, who is 74, and Ray Wilson and Nobby Stiles, both deceased. “Bad science comes from anecdotes and they are all we have got,” he told AFP at Queen Elizabeth University Hospital in Glasgow. “Anecdotes are quite persuasive as quite a lot of the 1966 winning team have dementia, and other football teams have been brought forward with high rates of dementia, but we don’t fully understand.” Stewart says it is not a simple matter of cause and effect. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.