Labour federation Cosatu has called for a review of the National Development Plan (NDP), which it believes is bound to fall short of its development targets. The proposal will be part of Cosatu’s contribution to the presidential jobs summit, which started in Midrand on Thursday, and is likely to place the federation at odds with its social partners, as well as President Cyril Ramaphosa’s administration and organised business. Although Cosatu has long had issues with the NDP, particularly regarding the economic chapter, its fresh call for a policy revision has been prompted by the decision of the National Planning Commission (NPC) to drastically alter the NDP’s projected 2030 unemployment rate. Ramaphosa was the deputy chairperson of the commission under former finance minister Trevor Manuel. The NDP, in its most optimistic forecast, had projected an unemployment rate of 6% by 2030, but the NPC has described this as out of reach and adjusted it to 14%. South Africa is only 12 years away from the NDP’s “vision 2030” and, according to Statistics South Africa, has a 27% unemployment rate. Speaking to the Mail & Guardian this week, Cosatu general secretary Bheki Ntshalintshali said the magnitude of the unemployment crisis had reached a point at which no policy, including the NDP, could be viewed as “untouchable”. “In our view, nobody can deny that the NDP is not going to meet its target. We don’t want to say ‘we told you so’ but, rather than putting on a posture of blaming, we need to go back to the table and say what needs to be done,” he said. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.