KwaZulu-Natal’s traditional authorities have failed to account for more than R11-million in levies collected by the province’s amakhosi from their subjects during the past financial year. They were also unable to account for more than R15-million in property under their control, according to the 2017-2018 annual report of the Traditional Levies and Trust Account. The report was submitted to the KwaZulu-Natal legislature this week by the MEC for co-operative governance and traditional affairs, Nomusa Dube-Ncube.  Poor accounting systems and a strike by the secretaries of the province’s tribal councils resulted in the auditor general’s office issuing a qualified audit outcome against the entity. The more than 350 secretaries, who receive a government stipend of R1 600 a month, want the department to pay them R12 000 instead, which the co-operative government department says it cannot afford. The levies and trust account is managed by the department in the province and is used to consolidate levies, fines and other revenue raised by the traditional authorities from people living on the land under their control. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.