Little-known businessmen Amir Mirza and Siyabonga Nene, over a period of just over four years, went from prospectors trying their luck in various industries to being on the verge of getting a multimillion-rand stake in an oil refinery and were in discussions to buy a stake in the Gupta family’s Brakfontein Coal Mine. Although not much is known about the details of the duo’s rise, company searches and conversations with former business partners reveal they started setting up companies, including Indiafrec, in 2012, and that they are partners in two entities. The two directors of Indiafrec approached the Public Investment Corporation (PIC) to fund a 50% acquisition of S&S Refinery LDA in Mozambique. But the transaction did not go ahead because the PIC feared the perception of a conflict of interest over Nene Jr’s involvement. Sajidahmed Pathan, an engineer turned fabric shop owner in the Oriental Plaza in Fordsburg, said he pulled out of oil business Sunflo Oil Mill because Nene and Mirza did not seem to know what business they wanted to pursue. Pathan said he met fellow Indian citizen Mirza in 2010, when he walked into his shop and they started discussing business opportunities. They wanted to include him in their oil company because he was an engineer, he said. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.