The government is “going to have a lot to say” about the VBS Mutual Bank saga, at the upcoming medium term budget policy statement, new finance Minister Tito Mboweni said this week. Hopefully this will include details on the costs of the damage which are unlikely to be insignificant. The state’s exposure — through the fiscus, local municipalities and state owned companies — appears to be around R2-billion. Municipal deposits trapped at the bank as of April 30 amounted to R1.2-billion, according to advocate Terry Motau’s report on the affairs of the bank. The total amount also includes investments and deposits made by the likes of the Public Investment Corporation (PIC) and state entities such as the Community Schemes Ombud Service (CSOS), as well as what the state will provide to cover small depositors. The PIC gave VBS a R350-million revolving credit facility and invested R18-million to acquire a 25% stake in the bank on behalf of its major client, the Government Employees’ Pension Fund, according to its most recently published schedule of unlisted investments. In addition, according to the auditor general’s report on its latest financial statements, the PIC stands to lose about R82.9-million on its 30% share in the Bophelo Insurance Group (BIG). This group had “material deposits” in VBS when it was placed under curatorship by the South African Reserve Bank earlier this year, according to the report. As a result, the Financial Sector Conduct Authority stopped the Bophelo Insurance Group from issuing new insurance business as there were concerns about financial soundness and the entity not meeting the capital adequacy requirements. The PIC has revalued its investment in the Bophelo Insurance Group at nil. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.