More than 70% of the revenue shortfall that South Africa faces in 2018 is because of a four-year backlog of unpaid value-added tax (VAT) refunds. And, because of the tough economic climate, revenue collected in the coming years is not expected to improve. The widely reported governance and tax administration weaknesses of the South African Revenue Services (Sars) during suspended commissioner Tom Moyane’s years continue to affect revenue collection targets and this year’s shortfall can also largely be attributed to this. The treasury, in the medium-term budget policy statement, lowered its “overly optimistic” revenue forecast for 2018-2019 by R27.4-billion, admitting that it had underestimated the extent of VAT refund backlogs owed to businesses. About R20-billion of the shortfall is a result of withheld VAT repayments, R11-billion is because of a backlog in Sars’ credit book and R9-billion is a revised estimate of Sars’ VAT refunds for the current tax year. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.