New ANC integrity committee chairperson George Mashamba believes the structure needs to become more than a tool used to target wayward party members and start addressing the broader issue of the ANC’s moral standing in society. It was established in 2013 to “protect the image of the organisation and enhance its standing in society by ensuring, among others, that urgent action is taken to deal with public officials, leaders and members of the ANC who face damaging allegations of improper conduct”. Since the 2012 conference, which took the resolution to establish the committee, the structure has found itself unpopular with some party members who have accused it of being factional and allowing itself to be used in plots against individuals. Mashamba told the Mail & Guardian he believed the committee’s guidelines needed to include more than just probing alleged wrongdoers and allow it to focus on the recurring project of maintaining the dignity of the ANC. “There is an impression in the public that this is a policing service commission with powers of investigation and arrest. Or that it is a judicial service commission with powers of presiding over cases,” Mashamba said. “I think it should be more than that. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.